% \iffalse
% This document requires lualatex
%%
%% Copyright (C) 2012-2018 Javier Bezos and Johannes L. Braams.
%% Copyright (C) 1989-2012 Johannes L. Braams and
%%           any individual authors listed elsewhere in this file.
%% All rights reserved.
%%
%% This file is part of the Babel system.
%% --------------------------------------
%%
%% It may be distributed and/or modified under the
%% conditions of the LaTeX Project Public License, either version 1.3
%% of this license or (at your option) any later version.
%% The latest version of this license is in
%%   http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt
%% and version 1.3 or later is part of all distributions of LaTeX
%% version 2003/12/01 or later.
%%
%% This work has the LPPL maintenance status "maintained".
%%
%% The Current Maintainer of this work is Javier Bezos.
%%
%% The list of derived (unpacked) files belonging to the distribution
%% and covered by LPPL is defined by the unpacking scripts (with
%% extension |.ins|) which are part of the distribution.
%%
% \fi
%
% \CheckSum{5011}
%
% \iffalse
%<*filedriver>
\ProvidesFile{babel.dtx}[2018/06/05 v3.22 The Babel package]
\documentclass{ltxdoc}
\GetFileInfo{babel.dtx}
\usepackage{fontspec}
\setmainfont[Scale=.88]{Noto Serif}
\setsansfont[Scale=.88]{Noto Sans}
\setmonofont[Scale=.88,FakeStretch=.95]{Noto Mono}
\raggedright
\addtolength{\textwidth}{25pt}
\addtolength{\textheight}{3.5cm}
\addtolength{\topmargin}{-2cm}
\font\manual=logo10 % font used for the METAFONT logo, etc.
\newcommand*\MF{{\manual META}\-{\manual FONT}}
\newcommand*\babel{\textsf{babel}}
\newcommand*\Babel{\textsf{Babel}}
\newcommand*\xetex{\textsf{xetex}}
\newcommand*\pdftex{\textsf{pdftex}}
\newcommand*\luatex{\textsf{luatex}}
\newcommand*\nb[1]{}
\newcommand*\m[1]{\mbox{$\langle$\normalfont\itshape#1\/$\rangle$}}
\newcommand*\langlist{%
  \meta{language}\texttt{,}\meta{language}\texttt{,}...}
\newcommand*\langvar{\m{lang}}
\newcommand*\Lopt[1]{\textsf{#1}}
\newcommand*\Lenv[1]{\texttt{#1}}
\newcommand*\menv[1]{\char`\{#1\char`\}}
\newcommand*\Eenv[1]{%
  \quad\ldots\quad
  \texttt{\color{thered}\string\end\menv{#1}}}
\newcommand*\file[1]{\texttt{#1}}
\newcommand*\cls[1]{\texttt{#1}}
\newcommand*\pkg[1]{\texttt{#1}}
\addtolength{\oddsidemargin}{1em}
\setlength{\leftmargini}{1.5em}
\usepackage{framed}
\usepackage{multicol}
\usepackage{color,colortbl}
\usepackage[linkbordercolor={.9 .7 .5}]{hyperref}
\newcommand\New[1]{%
  \colorbox[rgb]{.92, .86, .73}{New #1}\enspace\ignorespaces}
\definecolor{thered}  {rgb}{0.65,0.04,0.07}
\definecolor{thegrey} {gray}{0.8}
\definecolor{shadecolor}{rgb}{1,1,0.97}
\definecolor{messages}{rgb}{.66,.13,.27}
\makeatletter
\def\@begintheorem#1#2{%
  \list{}{}%
  \global\advance\@listdepth\m@ne
  \item[{\sffamily\bfseries\color{messages}\hspace*{1.3em}%
        \MakeUppercase{#1}}]}%
\makeatother
\newtheorem{warning}{Warning}
\newtheorem{note}{Note}
\newtheorem{example}{Example}
\newtheorem{troubleshooting}{Troubleshooting}
\let\bblxv\verbatim
\let\bblexv\endverbatim
\def\verbatim{\begin{shaded*}\bblxv\vskip-\baselineskip\vskip2.5\parsep}
\def\endverbatim{\bblexv\vskip-2\baselineskip\end{shaded*}}
\catcode`\_=\active
\def_{\bgroup\let_\egroup\color{thered}}
\def\MacroFont{\fontencoding \encodingdefault \fontfamily\ttdefault
  \fontseries\mddefault \fontshape\updefault \small \catcode`\_=\active}
\definecolor{shadecolor}{rgb}{0.96,0.96,0.93}
\def\PrintDescribeMacro#1{%
  \strut\MacroFont\color{thered}\normalsize\string#1}
\def\Describe#1{%
  \par\penalty-500\vskip3ex\noindent
  \DescribeMacro{#1}\args}
\def\DescribeOther{\vskip-4ex\Describe}
\makeatletter
\def\trouble#1{\addcontentsline{tsh}{trouble}{#1}}
\def\listoftroubles{\section*{Troubleshoooting}\@starttoc{tsh}}
\let\l@trouble\l@figure
\let\saved@check@percent\check@percent
\let\check@percent\relax
\def\args#1{%
  \def\bbl@tempa{#1}%
  \ifx\bbl@tempa\@empty\else#1\vskip1ex\fi\ignorespaces}
\begingroup % Changes to ltxdoc
  \catcode`\<\active
  \catcode`\>\active
  \gdef\check@plus@etc{%
    \let\bbl@next\pm@module
    \ifx*\next
      \let\bbl@next\star@module
    \else\ifx/\next
      \let\bbl@next\slash@module
    \else\ifx<\next
      \let\bbl@next\var@module
    \fi\fi\fi
    \bbl@next}
  \gdef\var@module#1#2#3>>{%
    $\langle$\pm@module#2#3>$\rangle$%
    \ifx*#2\ $\equiv$\fi}
\endgroup
\renewcommand*\l@section[2]{%
  \ifnum \c@tocdepth >\z@
    \addpenalty\@secpenalty
    \addvspace{1.0em \@plus\p@}%
    \setlength\@tempdima{2em}%
    \begingroup
      \parindent \z@ \rightskip \@pnumwidth
      \parfillskip -\@pnumwidth
      \leavevmode \bfseries
      \advance\leftskip\@tempdima
      \hskip -\leftskip
      #1\nobreak\hfil \nobreak\hb@xt@\@pnumwidth{\hss #2}\par
    \endgroup
  \fi}
\renewcommand*\l@subsection{\@dottedtocline{2}{2em}{3em}}
\renewcommand*\l@subsubsection{\@dottedtocline{3}{5em}{4em}}
\renewcommand*\l@paragraph{\@dottedtocline{4}{9em}{4.5em}}
\renewcommand\partname{Part}
\def\@pnumwidth{3em}
\makeatother
\begin{document}
\title{Babel, a multilingual package for use with \LaTeX's standard
   document classes\thanks{During the development ideas from Nico
   Poppelier, Piet van Oostrum and many others have been used.
   Bernd Raichle has provided many helpful suggestions.}}
\author{Johannes Braams\\
        Kersengaarde 33\\
        2723 BP Zoetermeer\\
        The Netherlands\\
        \normalsize From version 3.9 on, Javier Bezos\\
        \normalsize \texttt{www.texnia.com}}

\date{Typeset \today}
\begin{titlepage}
\begin{minipage}[t][0pt]{30cm}
\vspace{-3cm}\hspace{-7cm}
\sffamily
\begin{tabular}{p{8cm}p{15cm}}
\cellcolor[rgb]{.86,.73,.67}
&\cellcolor[rgb]{.95,.95,.95}
\vspace{3.6cm}%
\color[rgb]{.55,.4,.35}
\leftskip5mm
\sffamily\fontsize{72}{72}\selectfont Babel
\vspace{1.8cm}
\\
\cellcolor[rgb]{.95,.95,.95}
\vspace{2cm}\hspace{1.5cm}
\begin{minipage}{5cm}
\Large
Version \csname @gobble\expandafter\endcsname\fileversion\newline
\filedate

\vspace{1cm}
\textit{Original author}\newline
Johannes L. Braams

\vspace{.3cm}
\textit{Current maintainer}\newline
Javier Bezos
\end{minipage}
&\cellcolor[rgb]{.92, .86, .73}
\vspace{2cm}
\leftskip5mm
\begin{minipage}{10cm}
\large\setlength\parskip{3mm}\raggedright
  The standard distribution of \LaTeX\ contains a number of document
  classes that are meant to be used, but also serve as examples for
  other users to create their own document classes.  These document
  classes have become very popular among \LaTeX\ users. But it should
  be kept in mind that they were designed for American tastes and
  typography. At one time they even contained a number of hard-wired
  texts.

  This manual describes \babel{}, a package that makes use of the
  capabilities of \TeX\ version 3 and, to some extent, \xetex{} and
  \luatex, to provide an environment in which documents can be typeset
  in a language other than US English, or in more than one language or
  script.

  Current development is focused on Unicode engines (Xe\TeX{} and
  Lua\TeX) and the so-called \textit{complex scripts}.  New features
  related to font selection, bidi writing and the like will be added
  incrementally.

  \Babel{} provides support (total or partial) for about 200
  languages, either as a “classical” package option or as an
  |ini| file. Furthermore, new languages can be created from scratch
  easily.

 \vspace{20cm}
\end{minipage}
\end{tabular}
\end{minipage}
\end{titlepage}

\tableofcontents
\listoftroubles
\clearpage

\part{User guide}

\begin{itemize}
\item This user guide focuses on \LaTeX. There are also some notes on
  its use with Plain \TeX.

\item  Changes and new features with relation to version 3.8 are
  highlighted with \New{X.XX}\hspace{-.5em}. The most recent features
  could be still unstable. Please, report any issues you find.

\item If you are interested in the \TeX{} multilingual support, please
  join the \textsf{kadingira} list on
  \texttt{http://tug.org/mailman/listinfo/kadingira}.  You can follow
  the development of \babel{} on
  \texttt{https://github.com/latex3/latex2e/tree/master/required/babel}
  (which provides some sample files, too).

\item  See section \ref{contribute} for contributing a language.

\item The first sections describe the traditional way of loading a
  language (with |ldf| files). The alternative way based on |ini|
  files, which complements the previous one (it will \textit{not}
  replace it), is described below.
\end{itemize}

\section{The user interface}\label{U-I}

\subsection{Monolingual documents}

In most cases, a single language is required, and then all you need in
\LaTeX{} is to load the package using its standand mechanism for this
purpose, namely, passing that language as an optional argument. In
addition, you may want to set the font and input encodings.

\begin{example}
  Here is a simple full example for “traditional” \TeX{} engines
  (see below for \xetex{} and \luatex{}). The packages |fontenc| and
  |inputenc| do not belong to \babel, but they are included in the
  example because typically you will need them (however, the package
  \textsf{inputenc} may be omitted with \LaTeX{} $\ge$ 2018-04-01 if
  the encoding is UTF-8):
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}

\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}

_\usepackage[french]{babel}_

\begin{document}

Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose!

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}
\begin{troubleshooting}
\trouble{Paragraph ended before \textbackslash UTFviii@three@octets
was complete}
A common source of trouble is a wrong setting of the input encoding.
Very often you will get the following somewhat cryptic error:
\begin{verbatim}
! Paragraph ended before \UTFviii@three@octets was complete.
\end{verbatim}
Make sure you set the encoding actually used by your editor.
\end{troubleshooting}

Another approach is making the language (\Lopt{french} in the example)
a global option in order to let other packages detect and use it:
\begin{verbatim}
_\documentclass[french]{article}_
\usepackage{babel}
\usepackage{varioref}
\end{verbatim}

In this last example, the package \texttt{varioref} will also see
the option and will be able to use it.

\begin{note}
  Because of the way \babel{} has evolved, ``language'' can refer to
  (1) a set of hyphenation patterns as preloaded into the format, (2)
  a package option, (3) an |ldf| file, and (4) a name used in the
  document to select a language or dialect. So, a package option
  refers to a language in a generic way -- sometimes it is the actual
  language name used to select it, sometimes it is a file name loading
  a language with a different name, sometimes it is a file name
  loading several languages. Please, read the documentation for
  specific languages for further info.
\end{note}

\begin{troubleshooting}
  The following warning is about hyphenation patterns, which are
  not under the direct control of \babel:
\trouble{No hyphenation patterns were preloaded for (babel) the
  language `LANG' into the format}
\begin{verbatim}
Package babel Warning: No hyphenation patterns were preloaded for
(babel)                the language `LANG' into the format.
(babel)                Please, configure your TeX system to add them and
(babel)                rebuild the format. Now I will use the patterns
(babel)                preloaded for \language=0 instead on input line 57.
\end{verbatim}
  The document will be typeset, but very likely the text will not be
  correctly hyphenated. Some languages may be raising this warning
  wrongly (because they are not hyphenated); it is a bug to be fixed
  -- just ignore it. See the manual of your distribution (Mac\TeX,
  Mik\TeX, \TeX Live, etc.) for further info about how to configure
  it.
\end{troubleshooting}

\subsection{Multilingual documents}

In multilingual documents, just use several options. The last one is
considered the main language, activated by default. Sometimes, the
main language changes the document layout (eg, |spanish| and |french|).

\begin{example}
  In \LaTeX, the preamble of the document:
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[dutch,english]{babel}
\end{verbatim}
  would tell \LaTeX\ that the document would be written in two
  languages, Dutch and English, and that English would be the first
  language in use, and the main one.
\end{example}

You can also set the main language explicitly:
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[_main=english_,dutch]{babel}
\end{verbatim}

\begin{warning}
  Languages may be set as global and as package option at the same
  time, but in such a case you should set explicitly the main language
  with the package option |main|:
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass[_italian_]{book}
\usepackage[ngerman,_main=italian_]{babel}
\end{verbatim}
\end{warning}

\begin{warning}
  In the preamble the main language has \textit{not} been selected,
  except hyphenation patterns and the name assigned to |\languagename|
  (in particular, shorthands, captions and date are not activated). If
  you need to define boxes and the like in the preamble, you might
  want to use some of the language selectors described below.
\end{warning}

To switch the language there are two basic macros, decribed below in
detail: |\selectlanguage| is used for blocks of text, while
|\foreignlanguage| is for chunks of text inside paragraphs.

\begin{example}
A full bilingual document follows. The main language is |french|, which
is activated when the document begins. The package \textsf{inputenc}
may be omitted with \LaTeX{} $\ge$ 2018-04-01 if the encoding is UTF-8.
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}

\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}

_\usepackage[english,french]{babel}_

\begin{document}

Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose!

_\selectlanguage{english}_

And an English paragraph, with a short text in
_\foreignlanguage{french}{français}_.

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

\subsection{Modifiers}

\New{3.9c} The basic behavior of some languages can be modified when
loading \babel{} by means of \textit{modifiers}. They are set after
the language name, and are prefixed with a dot (only when the language
is set as package option -- neither global options nor the |main| key
accept them). An example is (spaces are not significant and they can
be added or removed):\footnote{No predefined ``axis'' for modifiers
are provided because languages and their scripts have quite different
needs.}
\begin{verbatim}
\usepackage[latin_.medieval_, spanish_.notilde.lcroman_, danish]{babel}
\end{verbatim}

Attributes (described below) are considered modifiers, ie, you can
set an attribute by including it in the list of modifiers. However,
modifiers is a more general mechanism.

\subsection{\textsf{xelatex} and \textsf{lualatex}}

Many languages are compatible with \textsf{xetex} and \textsf{luatex}.
With them you can use \babel{} to localize the documents.

The Latin script is covered by default in current \LaTeX{} (provided
the document encoding is UTF-8), because the font loader is preloaded
and the font is switched to |lmroman|. Other scripts require loading
\textsf{fontspec}. You may want to set the font attributes with
\textsf{fontspec}, too.

\begin{example}
  The following bilingual, single script document in UTF-8 encoding
  just prints a couple of ‘captions’ and |\today| in Danish and
  Vietnamese. No additional packages are required.
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}

_\usepackage[vietnamese,danish]{babel}_

\begin{document}

\prefacename{} -- \alsoname{} -- \today

\selectlanguage{vietnamese}

\prefacename{} -- \alsoname{} -- \today

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

\begin{example}
Here is a simple monolingual document in Russian (text from the
Wikipedia). Note neither \textsf{fontenc} nor \textsf{inputenc} are
necessary, but the document should be encoded in UTF-8 and a
so-called Unicode font must be loaded (in this example |\babelfont| is
used, described below).

\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}

_\usepackage[russian]{babel}_

\babelfont{rm}{DejaVu Serif}

\begin{document}

Россия, находящаяся на пересечении множества культур, а также
с учётом многонационального характера её населения, — отличается
высокой степенью этнокультурного многообразия и способностью к
межкультурному диалогу.

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

\subsection{Troubleshooting}

\begin{itemize}
\item Loading directly |sty| files in \LaTeX{} (ie,
  |\usepackage|\marg{language}) is deprecated and you will get the
  error:\footnote{In old versions the error read ``You have used an
  old interface to call babel'', not very helpful.}
\trouble{You are loading directly a language style}
\begin{verbatim}
! Package babel Error: You are loading directly a language style.
(babel)                This syntax is deprecated and you must use
(babel)                \usepackage[language]{babel}.
\end{verbatim}

\item  Another typical error when using \babel{} is the
  following:\footnote{In old versions the error read ``You haven't
  loaded the language LANG yet''.}
\trouble{Unknown language `LANG'}
\begin{verbatim}
! Package babel Error: Unknown language `#1'. Either you have
(babel)                misspelled its name, it has not been installed,
(babel)                or you requested it in a previous run. Fix its name,
(babel)                install it or just rerun the file, respectively. In
(babel)                some cases, you may need to remove the aux file
\end{verbatim}
  The most frequent reason is, by far, the latest (for example, you
  included |spanish|, but you realized this language is not used after
  all, and therefore you removed it from the option list). In most
  cases, the error vanishes when the document is typeset again, but in
  more severe ones you will need to remove the |aux| file.
\end{itemize}
\subsection{Plain}

In Plain, load languages styles with |\input| and then use
|\begindocument| (the latter is defined by \babel):
\begin{verbatim}
\input estonian.sty
\begindocument
\end{verbatim}

\begin{warning}
  Not all languages provide a |sty| file and some of them are not
  compatible with Plain.\footnote{Even in the \babel{} kernel there
  were some macros not compatible with plain. Hopefully these issues
  will be fixed soon.}
\end{warning}

\subsection{Basic language selectors}

This section describes the commands to be used in the document to
switch the language in multilingual documents. In most cases, only the
two basic macros |\selectlanguage| and |\foreignlanguage| are
necessary. The environments |otherlanguage|, |otherlanguage*| and
|hyphenrules| are auxiliary, and described in the next section.

The main language is selected automatically when the |document|
environment begins.

\Describe{\selectlanguage}{\marg{language}}
When a user wants to switch from one language to another he can
do so using the macro |\selectlanguage|. This macro takes the
language, defined previously by a language definition file, as
its argument. It calls several macros that should be defined in
the language definition files to activate the special definitions
for the language chosen:
\begin{verbatim}
\selectlanguage{german}
\end{verbatim}

This command can be used as environment, too.

\begin{note}
  For ``historical reasons'', a macro name is converted to a language
  name without the leading |\|; in other words,
  |\selectlanguage{\german}| is equivalent to |\selectlanguage{german}|.
  Using a macro instead of a ``real'' name is deprecated.
\end{note}

\begin{warning}
  If used inside braces there might be some non-local changes, as this
  would be roughly equivalent to:
\begin{verbatim}
{\selectlanguage{<inner-language>} ...}\selectlanguage{<outer-language>}
\end{verbatim}
  If you want a change which is really local, you must enclose this
  code with an additional grouping level.
\end{warning}

\Describe{\foreignlanguage}{\marg{language}\marg{text}}
The command |\foreignlanguage| takes two arguments; the second
argument is a phrase to be typeset according to the rules of the
language named in its first one. This command (1) only switches the
extra definitions and the hyphenation rules for the language,
\emph{not} the names and dates, (2) does not send information about
the language to auxiliary files (i.e., the surrounding language is
still in force), and (3) it works even if the language has not been
set as package option (but in such a case it only sets the hyphenation
patterns and a warning is shown).

\subsection{Auxiliary language selectors}

\Describe{\begin\menv{otherlanguage}}{\marg{language}\Eenv{otherlanguage}}

The environment \Lenv{otherlanguage} does basically the same as
|\selectlanguage|, except the language change is (mostly) local to
the environment.

Actually, there might be some non-local changes, as this environment
is roughly equivalent to:
\begin{verbatim}
\begingroup
\selectlanguage{<inner-language>}
...
\endgroup
\selectlanguage{<outer-language>}
\end{verbatim}
If you want a change which is really local, you must enclose this
environment with an additional grouping, like braces |{}|.

Spaces after the environment are ignored.

\Describe{\begin\menv{otherlanguage*}}%
{\marg{language}\Eenv{otherlanguage*}}

Same as |\foreignlanguage| but as environment. Spaces after the
environment are \textit{not} ignored.

This environment was originally intended for intermixing left-to-right
typesetting with right-to-left typesetting in engines not supporting a
change in the writing direction inside a line. However, by default it
never complied with the documented behavior and it is just a version as
environment of |\foreignlanguage|.

\Describe{\begin\menv{hyphenrules}}{\marg{language}\Eenv{hyphenrules}}

The environment \Lenv{hyphenrules} can be used to select \emph{only} the
hyphenation rules to be used (it can be used as command, too). This can
for instance be used to select `nohyphenation', provided that in
\file{language.dat} the `language' \textsf{nohyphenation} is defined by
loading \file{zerohyph.tex}. It deactivates language shorthands, too
(but not user shorthands).

Except for these simple uses, |hyphenrules| is discouraged and
|otherlanguage*| (the starred version) is preferred, as the former does
not take into account possible changes in encodings of characters like,
say, |'| done by some languages (eg, \textsf{italian}, \textsf{french},
\textsf{ukraineb}). To set hyphenation exceptions, use
|\babelhyphenation| (see below).

\subsection{More on selection}

\Describe{\babeltags}{\char`\{\m{tag1} \texttt{=} \m{language1}, \m{tag2}
\texttt{=} \m{language2}, \dots\char`\}}

\New{3.9i} In multilingual documents with many language switches the
commands above can be cumbersome. With this tool shorter names can be
defined. It adds nothing really new -- it is just syntactical sugar.

It defines |\text|\m{tag1}\marg{text} to be
|\foreignlanguage|\marg{language1}\marg{text}, and |\begin|\marg{tag1}
to be |\begin{otherlanguage*}|\marg{language1}, and so on. Note
|\|\m{tag1} is also allowed, but remember to set it locally inside a
group.
\begin{example}
With
\begin{verbatim}
\babeltags{de = german}
\end{verbatim}
you can write
\begin{verbatim}
text \textde{German text} text
\end{verbatim}
and
\begin{verbatim}
text
\begin{de}
  German text
\end{de}
text
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

\begin{note}
  Something like \verb|\babeltags{finnish = finnish}| is legitimate --
  it defines |\textfinnish| and |\finnish| (and, of course,
  |\begin{finnish}|).
\end{note}

\begin{note}
  Actually, there may be another advantage in the ‘short’ syntax
  |\text|\m{tag}, namely, it is not affected by |\MakeUppercase| (while
  |\foreignlanguage| is).
\end{note}

\Describe{\babelensure}{|[include=|\m{commands}|,exclude=|\m{commands}%
  |,fontenc=|\m{encoding}|]|\marg{language}}

\New{3.9i} Except in a few languages, like \textsf{russian},
captions and dates are just strings, and do not switch the
language. That means you should set it explicitly if you want to use
them, or hyphenation (and in some cases the text itself) will be
wrong. For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\foreignlanguage{russian}{text \foreignlanguage{polish}{\seename} text}
\end{verbatim}

Of course, \TeX{} can do it for you. To avoid switching the language
all the while, |\babelensure| redefines the captions for a given
language to wrap them with a selector:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelensure{polish}
\end{verbatim}
By default only the basic captions and |\today| are redefined, but you
can add further macros with the key |include| in the optional argument
(without commas). Macros not to be modified are listed in
|exclude|. You can also enforce a font encoding with
|fontenc|.\footnote{With it encoded string may not work as expected.}
A couple of examples:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelensure[include=\Today]{spanish}
\babelensure[fontenc=T5]{vietnamese}
\end{verbatim}

They are activated when the language is selected (at the |afterextras|
event), and it makes some assumptions which could not be fulfilled in
some languages. Note also you should include only macros defined by
the language, not global macros (eg, |\TeX| of |\dag|).

With |ini| files (see below), captions are ensured by default.

\subsection{Shorthands}

A \textit{shorthand} is a sequence of one or two characters that
expands to arbitrary \TeX{} code.

Shorthands can be used for different kinds of things, as for example:
(1) in some languages shorthands such as |"a| are defined to be able
to hyphenate the word if the encoding is |OT1|; (2) in some languages
shorthands such as |!| are used to insert the right amount of white
space; (3) several kinds of discretionaries and breaks can be inserted
easily with |"-|, |"=|, etc.

The package \textsf{inputenc} as well as \xetex{} an \luatex{} have
alleviated entering non-ASCII characters, but minority languages and
some kinds of text can still require characters not directly available
on the keyboards (and sometimes not even as separated or precomposed
Unicode characters). As to the point 2, now \textsf{pdfTeX} provides
|\knbccode|, and \luatex{} can manipulate the glyph list. Tools for
point 3 can be still very useful in general.

There are three levels of shorthands: \textit{user},
\textit{language}, and \textit{system} (by order of
precedence). Version 3.9 introduces the \textit{language user} level
on top of the user level, as described below. In most cases, you will
use only shorthands provided by languages.

\begin{note} Note the following:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Activated chars used for two-char shorthands cannot be followed
  by a closing brace |}| and the spaces following are gobbled.  With
  one-char shorthands (eg,~|:|), they are preserved.
\item If on a certain level (system, language, user) there is a
  one-char shorthand, two-char ones starting with that
  char and on the same level are ignored.
\item Since they are active, a shorthand cannot contain the same
  character in its definition (except if it is deactivated with, eg,
  |string|).
\end{enumerate}
\end{note}

A typical error when using shorthands is the following:
\trouble{Argument of \textbackslash language@active@arg"
has an extra \textbraceright}
\begin{verbatim}
! Argument of \language@active@arg" has an extra }.
\end{verbatim}
It means there is a closing brace just after a shorthand, which is not
allowed (eg,~|"}|). Just add |{}| after (eg,~|"{}}|).

\Describe{\shorthandon}{\marg{shorthands-list}}
\DescribeOther{\shorthandoff}{%
\colorbox{thegrey}{\ttfamily\hskip-.2em*\hskip-.2em}%
\marg{shorthands-list}}
It is sometimes necessary to switch a shorthand
character off temporarily, because it must be used in an
entirely different way. For this purpose, the user commands
|\shorthandoff| and |\shorthandon| are provided. They each take a
list of characters as their arguments.

The command |\shorthandoff| sets the |\catcode| for each of the
characters in its argument to other (12); the command |\shorthandon|
sets the |\catcode| to active (13). Both commands only work on `known'
shorthand characters. If a character is not known to be a shorthand
character its category code will be left unchanged.

\New{3.9a} However, |\shorthandoff| does not behave as
you would expect with characters like |~| or |^|, because they
usually are not ``other''. For them |\shorthandoff*| is provided,
so that with
\begin{verbatim}
\shorthandoff*{~^}
\end{verbatim}
|~| is still active, very likely with the meaning of a non-breaking
space, and |^| is the superscript character. The catcodes used are
those when the shorthands are defined, usually when language files are
loaded.

\Describe{\useshorthands}{%
\colorbox{thegrey}{\ttfamily\hskip-.2em*\hskip-.2em}%
\marg{char}}

The command |\useshorthands| initiates the definition of user-defined
shorthand sequences. It has one argument, the character that starts
these personal shorthands.

\New{3.9a} User shorthands are not always alive, as they may
be deactivated by languages (for example, if you use |"| for your user
shorthands and switch from \textsf{german} to \textsf{french}, they
stop working). Therefore, a starred version
|\useshorthands*|\marg{char} is provided, which makes sure shorthands
are always activated.

Currently, if the package option |shorthands| is used, you must include any
character to be activated with |\useshorthands|. This restriction will
be lifted in a future release.

\Describe\defineshorthand{\texttt{[}\langlist\texttt{]}%
     \marg{shorthand}\marg{code}}

The command |\defineshorthand| takes two arguments: the first is
a one- or two-character shorthand sequence, and the second is the
code the shorthand should expand to.

\New{3.9a} An optional argument allows to (re)define language and
system shorthands (some languages do not activate shorthands, so you
may want to add |\languageshorthands|\marg{lang} to the corresponding
|\extras|\m{lang}, as explained below). By default, user shorthands
are (re)defined.

User shorthands override language ones, which in turn override
system shorthands. Language-dependent user shorthands (new in
3.9) take precedence over ``normal'' user shorthands.

\begin{example}
  Let's assume you want a unified set of shorthand for discretionaries
  (languages do not define shorthands consistently, and |"-|, |\-|,
  |"=| have different meanings).  You could start with, say:
\begin{verbatim}
\useshorthands*{"}
\defineshorthand{"*}{\babelhyphen{soft}}
\defineshorthand{"-}{\babelhyphen{hard}}
\end{verbatim}
  However, behavior of hyphens is language dependent. For example, in
  languages like Polish and Portuguese, a hard hyphen inside compound
  words are repeated at the beginning of the next line. You could then
  set:
\begin{verbatim}
\defineshorthand[*polish,*portugese]{"-}{\babelhyphen{repeat}}
\end{verbatim}
  Here, options with |*| set a language-dependent user shorthand,
  which means the generic one above only applies for the rest of
  languages; without |*| they would (re)define the language shorthands
  instead, which are overriden by user ones.

  Now, you have a single unified shorthand (|"-|), with a
  content-based meaning (`compound word hyphen') whose visual behavior
  is that expected in each context.
\end{example}

\Describe{\aliasshorthand}{\marg{original}\marg{alias}}

The command |\aliasshorthand| can be used to let another
character perform the same functions as the default shorthand
character. If one prefers for example to use the character |/|
over |"| in typing Polish texts, this can be achieved by entering
|\aliasshorthand{"}{/}|.

\begin{note}
  The substitute character must \textit{not} have been declared before
  as shorthand (in such a case, |\aliashorthands| is ignored).
\end{note}

\begin{example}
  The following example shows how to replace a shorthand by another
\begin{verbatim}
\aliasshorthand{~}{^}
\AtBeginDocument{\shorthandoff*{~}}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

\begin{warning}
  Shorthands remember somehow the original character, and the fallback
  value is that of the latter. So, in this example, if no shorthand if
  found, |^| expands to a non-breaking space, because this is the
  value of |~| (internally, |^| still calls |\active@char~| or
  |\normal@char~|). Furthermore, if you change the |system| value of
  |^| with |\defineshorthand| nothing happens.
\end{warning}

\Describe{\languageshorthands}{\marg{language}} The command
|\languageshorthands| can be used to switch the shorthands on the
language level. It takes one argument, the name of a language or
|none| (the latter does what its name suggests).\footnote{Actually,
any name not corresponding to a language group does the same as
\texttt{none}. However, follow this convention because it might be
enforced in future releases of \babel{} to catch possible errors.}
Note that for this to work the language should have been specified as
an option when loading the \babel\ package.  For example, you can use
in \textsf{english} the shorthands defined by \textsf{ngerman} with
\begin{verbatim}
\addto\extrasenglish{\languageshorthands{ngerman}}
\end{verbatim}
(You may also need to activate them with, for example,
|\useshorthands|.)

Very often, this is a more convenient way to deactivate shorthands
than |\shorthandoff|, as for example if you want to define a macro
to easy typing phonetic characters with \textsf{tipa}:
\begin{verbatim}
\newcommand{\myipa}[1]{{\languageshorthands{none}\tipaencoding#1}}
\end{verbatim}

\Describe{\babelshorthand}{\marg{shorthand}}
With this command you can use a shorthand even if (1) not activated in
\texttt{shorthands} (in this case only shorthands for the current
language are taken into account, ie, not user shorthands), (2) turned
off with |\shorthandoff| or (3) deactivated with the internal
|\bbl@deactivate|; for example, \verb|\babelshorthand{"u}| or
\verb|\babelshorthand{:}|.  (You can conveniently define your own
macros, or even you own user shorthands provided they do not ovelap.)

For your records, here is a list of shorthands, but you must double
check them, as they may change:\footnote{Thanks to Enrico Gregorio}

\begin{description}
\itemsep=-\parskip
\item[Languages with no shorthands] Croatian, English (any variety),
  Indonesian, Hebrew, Interlingua, Irish, Lower Sorbian, Malaysian,
  North Sami, Romanian, Scottish, Welsh
\item[Languages with only \texttt{"} as defined shorthand character]
  Albanian, Bulgarian, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, German (old and new
  orthography, also Austrian), Icelandic, Italian, Norwegian, Polish,
  Portuguese (also Brazilian), Russian, Serbian (with Latin script),
  Slovene, Swedish, Ukrainian, Upper Sorbian
\item[Basque] |" ' ~|
\item[Breton] |: ; ? !|
\item[Catalan] |" ' `|
\item[Czech] |" -|
\item[Esperanto] |^|
\item[Estonian] |" ~|
\item[French] (all varieties) |: ; ? !|
\item[Galician] |" . ' ~ < >|
\item[Greek] |~|
\item[Hungarian] |`|
\item[Kurmanji] |^|
\item[Latin] |" ^ =|
\item[Slovak] |" ^ ' -|
\item[Spanish] |" . < > '|
\item[Turkish] |: ! =|
\end{description}
In addition, the \babel{} core declares |~| as a one-char shorthand
which is let, like the standard |~|, to a non breaking
space.\footnote{This declaration serves to nothing, but it is
preserved for backward compatibility.}

\subsection{Package options}

\New{3.9a}
These package options are processed before language options, so
that they are taken into account irrespective of its order. The first
three options have been available in previous versions.

\Describe{KeepShorthandsActive}{}
Tells babel not to deactivate shorthands after loading a language
file, so that they are also availabe in the preamble.

\Describe{activeacute}{} For some languages \babel\ supports this
options to set |'| as a shorthand in case it is not done by default.

\Describe{activegrave}{}
Same for |`|.

\Describe{shorthands=}{\meta{char}\meta{char}...
$\string|$ \texttt{off}}
The only language shorthands activated
are those given, like, eg:
\begin{verbatim}
\usepackage[esperanto,french,shorthands=:;!?]{babel}
\end{verbatim}
If \verb|'| is included, \texttt{activeacute} is set; if \verb|`| is
included, \texttt{activegrave} is set.  Active characters (like
\verb|~|) should be preceded by \verb|\string| (otherwise they will be
expanded by \LaTeX{} before they are passed to the package and
therefore they will not be recognized); however, |t| is provided for
the common case of |~| (as well as |c| for not so common case of the
comma).

With |shorthands=off| no language shorthands are defined,
As some languages use this mechanism for tools not available
otherwise, a macro \verb|\babelshorthand| is defined, which allows
using them; see above.

\Describe{safe=}{\texttt{none} $\string|$ \texttt{ref} $\string|$
\texttt{bib}} Some \LaTeX{} macros are redefined so that using
shorthands is safe. With \texttt{safe=bib} only |\nocite|, |\bibcite|
and |\bibitem| are redefined. With |safe=ref| only |\newlabel|, |\ref|
and |\pageref| are redefined (as well as a few macros from
\textsf{varioref} and \textsf{ifthen}). With |safe=none| no macro is
redefined. This option is strongly recommended, because a good deal of
incompatibilities and errors are related to these redefinitions -- of
course, in such a case you cannot use shorthands in these macros, but
this is not a real problem (just use ``allowed'' characters).

\Describe{math=}{\texttt{active} $\string|$ \texttt{normal}}
Shorthands are mainly intended for text, not for math. By setting this
option with the value |normal| they are deactivated in math mode
(default is |active|) and things like |${a'}$| (a closing brace after
a shorthand) are not a source of trouble any more.

\Describe{config=}{\meta{file}} Load \meta{file}\texttt{.cfg} instead
of the default config file |bblopts.cfg| (the file is loaded even
with |noconfigs|).

\Describe{main=}{\meta{language}} Sets the main language, as explained
above, ie, this language is always loaded last. If it is not given as
package or global option, it is added to the list of requested
languages.

\Describe{headfoot=}{\meta{language}} By default, headlines and
footlines are not touched (only marks), and if they contain language
dependent macros (which is not usual) there may be unexpected
results. With this option you may set the language in heads and foots.

\Describe{noconfigs}{} Global and language default config files are
not loaded, so you can make sure your document is not spoilt by an
unexpected \texttt{.cfg} file. However, if the key |config| is set,
this file is loaded.

\Describe{showlanguages}{} Prints to the log the list of languages
loaded when the format was created: number (remember dialects can
share it), name, hyphenation file and exceptions file.

\Describe{nocase}{} \New{3.9l} Language settings for uppercase and
lowercase mapping (as set by |\SetCase|) are ignored. Use only if there
are incompatibilities with other packages.

\Describe{silent}{} \New{3.9l} No warnings and no \textit{infos} are
written to the log file.\footnote{You can use alternatively the
package \textsf{silence}.}

\Describe{strings=}{\texttt{generic} $\string|$ \texttt{unicode}
$\string|$ \texttt{encoded} $\string|$ \meta{label} $\string|$
\meta{font encoding}} Selects the encoding of strings in languages
supporting this feature. Predefined labels are |generic| (for
traditional \TeX, LICR and ASCII strings), |unicode| (for engines like
\xetex{} and \luatex) and |encoded| (for special cases requiring mixed
encodings). Other allowed values are font encoding codes (|T1|, |T2A|,
|LGR|, |L7X|...), but only in languages supporting them. Be aware with
|encoded| captions are protected, but they work in |\MakeUppercase|
and the like (this feature misuses some internal \LaTeX\ tools, so use
it only as a last resort).

\Describe{hyphenmap=}{\texttt{off} $\string|$ \texttt{main}
$\string|$ \texttt{select} $\string|$ \texttt{other} $\string|$
\texttt{other*}}

\New{3.9g} Sets the behavior of case mapping for hyphenation,
provided the language defines it.\footnote{Turned off in plain.} It
can take the following values:
\begin{description}
\renewcommand\makelabel[1]{%
  \hspace\labelsep\normalfont\ttfamily\color{thered}#1}
\itemsep=-\parskip
\item[off] deactivates this feature and no case mapping is applied;
\item[first] sets it at the first switching commands in the
  current or parent scope (typically, when the aux file is first read
  and at |\begin{document}|, but also the first |\selectlanguage| in
    the preamble), and it's the default if a single
    language option has been stated;\footnote{Duplicated options count
    as several ones.}
\item[select] sets it only at |\selectlanguage|;
\item[other] also sets it at |otherlanguage|;
\item[other*] also sets it at |otherlanguage*| as well as in heads and
  foots (if the option |headfoot| is used) and in auxiliary files (ie,
  at |\select@language|), and it's the default if several language
  options have been stated. The option |first| can be regarded as an
  optimized version of \texttt{other*} for monolingual
  documents.\footnote{Providing |foreign| is pointless, because the
  case mapping applied is that at the end of paragraph, but if either
  \xetex{} or \luatex{} change this behavior it might be added. On
  the other hand, |other| is provided even if I [JBL] think it isn't
  really useful, but who knows.}
\end{description}

\Describe{bidi=}{}

\New{3.14} Selects the bidi algorithm to be used in \luatex{} and
\xetex{}. See sec.~\ref{bidi}.

\Describe{layout=}{}

\New{3.16} Selects which layout elements are adapted in bidi
documents. See sec.~\ref{bidi}.

\subsection{The \texttt{base} option}

With this package option \babel{} just loads some basic macros (those
in |switch.def|), defines |\AfterBabelLanguage| and exits. It also
selects the hyphenations patterns for the last language passed as
option (by its name in |language.dat|). There are two main uses:
classes and packages, and as a last resort in case there are, for some
reason, incompatible languages. It can be used if you just want to
select the hyphenations patterns of a single language, too.
% TODO: example

\Describe\AfterBabelLanguage{\marg{option-name}\marg{code}}

This command is currently the only provided by |base|. Executes
\meta{code} when the file loaded by the corresponding package option
is finished (at |\ldf@finish|). The setting is global. So
\begin{verbatim}
\AfterBabelLanguage{french}{...}
\end{verbatim}
does ... at the end of |french.ldf|. It can be used in |ldf| files,
too, but in such a case the code is executed only if
\meta{option-name} is the same as |\CurrentOption| (which could not
be the same as the option name as set in |\usepackage|!).

\begin{example}
  Consider two languages \textsf{foo} and \textsf{bar} defining the
  same |\macro| with |\newcommand|. An error is raised if you attempt
  to load both. Here is a way to overcome this problem:
\begin{verbatim}
\usepackage[base]{babel}
\AfterBabelLanguage{foo}{%
  \let\macroFoo\macro
  \let\macro\relax}
\usepackage[foo,bar]{babel}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

\subsection{\texttt{ini} files}

An alternative approach to define a language is by means of an
\texttt{ini} file. Currently \babel{} provides about 200 of these
files containing the basic data required for a language.

Most of them set the date, and many also the captions (Unicode and
LICR). They will be evolving with the time to add more features
(something to keep in mind if backward compatibility is important). The
following section shows how to make use of them currently (by means of
|\babelprovide|), but a higher interface, based on package options, in
under development (in other words, |\babelprovide| is mainly intended
for auxiliary tasks).

\begin{example}
  Although Georgian has its own \texttt{ldf} file, here is how to
  declare this language with an |ini| file in Unicode engines.
\begingroup
\setmonofont[Scale=.87,Script=Georgian]{DejaVu Sans Mono}
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{book}

\usepackage{babel}
\babelprovide[import=ka, main]{georgian}

\babelfont{rm}{DejaVu Sans}

\begin{document}

\tableofcontents

\chapter{სამზარეულო და სუფრის ტრადიციები}

ქართული ტრადიციული სამზარეულო ერთ-ერთი უმდიდრესია მთელ მსოფლიოში.

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\endgroup
\end{example}

Here is the list (u means Unicode captions, and l means LICR
captions):

\begingroup
\bigskip\hrule\nobreak

\makeatletter
\def\tag#1{\par\@hangfrom{\makebox[7em][l]{#1}}\ignorespaces}
\def\hascapu{\textsuperscript{u}}
\def\hascapl{\textsuperscript{l}}

\begin{multicols}{2}

\tag{af} Afrikaans\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{agq} Aghem
\tag{ak} Akan
\tag{am} Amharic\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ar} Arabic\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ar-DZ} Arabic\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ar-MA} Arabic\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ar-SY} Arabic\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{as} Assamese
\tag{asa} Asu
\tag{ast} Asturian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{az-Cyrl} Azerbaijani
\tag{az-Latn} Azerbaijani
\tag{az} Azerbaijani\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{bas} Basaa
\tag{be} Belarusian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{bem} Bemba
\tag{bez} Bena
\tag{bg} Bulgarian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{bm} Bambara
\tag{bn} Bangla\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{bo} Tibetan\hascapu
\tag{brx} Bodo
\tag{bs-Cyrl} Bosnian
\tag{bs-Latn} Bosnian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{bs} Bosnian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ca} Catalan\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ce} Chechen
\tag{cgg} Chiga
\tag{chr} Cherokee
\tag{ckb} Central Kurdish
\tag{cs} Czech\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{cy} Welsh\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{da} Danish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{dav} Taita
\tag{de-AT} German\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{de-CH} German\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{de} German\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{dje} Zarma
\tag{dsb} Lower Sorbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{dua} Duala
\tag{dyo} Jola-Fonyi
\tag{dz} Dzongkha
\tag{ebu} Embu
\tag{ee} Ewe
\tag{el} Greek\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{en-AU} English\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{en-CA} English\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{en-GB} English\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{en-NZ} English\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{en-US} English\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{en} English\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{eo} Esperanto\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{es-MX} Spanish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{es} Spanish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{et} Estonian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{eu} Basque\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ewo} Ewondo
\tag{fa} Persian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ff} Fulah
\tag{fi} Finnish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{fil} Filipino
\tag{fo} Faroese
\tag{fr} French\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{fr-BE} French\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{fr-CA} French\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{fr-CH} French\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{fr-LU} French\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{fur} Friulian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{fy} Western Frisian
\tag{ga} Irish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{gd} Scottish Gaelic\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{gl} Galician\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{gsw} Swiss German
\tag{gu} Gujarati
\tag{guz} Gusii
\tag{gv} Manx
\tag{ha-GH} Hausa
\tag{ha-NE} Hausa\hascapl
\tag{ha} Hausa
\tag{haw} Hawaiian
\tag{he} Hebrew\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{hi} Hindi\hascapu
\tag{hr} Croatian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{hsb} Upper Sorbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{hu} Hungarian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{hy} Armenian
\tag{ia} Interlingua\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{id} Indonesian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ig} Igbo
\tag{ii} Sichuan Yi
\tag{is} Icelandic\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{it} Italian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ja} Japanese
\tag{jgo} Ngomba
\tag{jmc} Machame
\tag{ka} Georgian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{kab} Kabyle
\tag{kam} Kamba
\tag{kde} Makonde
\tag{kea} Kabuverdianu
\tag{khq} Koyra Chiini
\tag{ki} Kikuyu
\tag{kk} Kazakh
\tag{kkj} Kako
\tag{kl} Kalaallisut
\tag{kln} Kalenjin
\tag{km} Khmer
\tag{kn} Kannada\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ko} Korean
\tag{kok} Konkani
\tag{ks} Kashmiri
\tag{ksb} Shambala
\tag{ksf} Bafia
\tag{ksh} Colognian
\tag{kw} Cornish
\tag{ky} Kyrgyz
\tag{lag} Langi
\tag{lb} Luxembourgish
\tag{lg} Ganda
\tag{lkt} Lakota
\tag{ln} Lingala
\tag{lo} Lao\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{lrc} Northern Luri
\tag{lt} Lithuanian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{lu} Luba-Katanga
\tag{luo} Luo
\tag{luy} Luyia
\tag{lv} Latvian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{mas} Masai
\tag{mer} Meru
\tag{mfe} Morisyen
\tag{mg} Malagasy
\tag{mgh} Makhuwa-Meetto
\tag{mgo} Metaʼ
\tag{mk} Macedonian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ml} Malayalam\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{mn} Mongolian
\tag{mr} Marathi\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ms-BN} Malay\hascapl
\tag{ms-SG} Malay\hascapl
\tag{ms} Malay\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{mt} Maltese
\tag{mua} Mundang
\tag{my} Burmese
\tag{mzn} Mazanderani
\tag{naq} Nama
\tag{nb} Norwegian Bokmål\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{nd} North Ndebele
\tag{ne} Nepali
\tag{nl} Dutch\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{nmg} Kwasio
\tag{nn} Norwegian Nynorsk\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{nnh} Ngiemboon
\tag{nus} Nuer
\tag{nyn} Nyankole
\tag{om} Oromo
\tag{or} Odia
\tag{os} Ossetic
\tag{pa-Arab} Punjabi
\tag{pa-Guru} Punjabi
\tag{pa} Punjabi
\tag{pl} Polish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{pms} Piedmontese\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ps} Pashto
\tag{pt-BR} Portuguese\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{pt-PT} Portuguese\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{pt} Portuguese\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{qu} Quechua
\tag{rm} Romansh\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{rn} Rundi
\tag{ro} Romanian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{rof} Rombo
\tag{ru} Russian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{rw} Kinyarwanda
\tag{rwk} Rwa
\tag{sa-Beng} Sanskrit
\tag{sa-Deva} Sanskrit
\tag{sa-Gujr} Sanskrit
\tag{sa-Knda} Sanskrit
\tag{sa-Mlym} Sanskrit
\tag{sa-Telu} Sanskrit
\tag{sa} Sanskrit
\tag{sah} Sakha
\tag{saq} Samburu
\tag{sbp} Sangu
\tag{se} Northern Sami\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{seh} Sena
\tag{ses} Koyraboro Senni
\tag{sg} Sango
\tag{shi-Latn} Tachelhit
\tag{shi-Tfng} Tachelhit
\tag{shi} Tachelhit
\tag{si} Sinhala
\tag{sk} Slovak\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sl} Slovenian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{smn} Inari Sami
\tag{sn} Shona
\tag{so} Somali
\tag{sq} Albanian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Cyrl-BA} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Cyrl-ME} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Cyrl-XK} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Cyrl} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Latn-BA} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Latn-ME} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Latn-XK} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr-Latn} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sr} Serbian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sv} Swedish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{sw} Swahili
\tag{ta} Tamil\hascapu
\tag{te} Telugu\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{teo} Teso
\tag{th} Thai\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ti} Tigrinya
\tag{tk} Turkmen\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{to} Tongan
\tag{tr} Turkish\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{twq} Tasawaq
\tag{tzm} Central Atlas Tamazight
\tag{ug} Uyghur
\tag{uk} Ukrainian\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{ur} Urdu\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{uz-Arab} Uzbek
\tag{uz-Cyrl} Uzbek
\tag{uz-Latn} Uzbek
\tag{uz} Uzbek
\tag{vai-Latn} Vai
\tag{vai-Vaii} Vai
\tag{vai} Vai
\tag{vi} Vietnamese\hascapu\hascapl
\tag{vun} Vunjo
\tag{wae} Walser
\tag{xog} Soga
\tag{yav} Yangben
\tag{yi} Yiddish
\tag{yo} Yoruba
\tag{yue} Cantonese
\tag{zgh} Standard Moroccan Tamazight
\tag{zh-Hans-HK} Chinese
\tag{zh-Hans-MO} Chinese
\tag{zh-Hans-SG} Chinese
\tag{zh-Hans} Chinese
\tag{zh-Hant-HK} Chinese
\tag{zh-Hant-MO} Chinese
\tag{zh-Hant} Chinese
\tag{zh} Chinese
\tag{zu} Zulu

\end{multicols}
\endgroup
\hrule
\bigskip

In some contexts (currently |\babelfont|) an \texttt{ini} file may be
loaded by its name. Here is the list of the names currently
supported. With these languages, |\babelfont| loads (if not done
before) the language and script names (even if the language is defined
as a package option with an \textsf{ldf} file).

\begingroup
\bigskip\hrule\nobreak

\let\\\par

\begin{multicols}{2}

aghem\\
akan\\
albanian\\
american\\
amharic\\
arabic\\
arabic-algeria\\
arabic-DZ\\
arabic-morocco\\
arabic-MA\\
arabic-syria\\
arabic-SY\\
armenian\\
assamese\\
asturian\\
asu\\
australian\\
austrian\\
azerbaijani-cyrillic\\
azerbaijani-cyrl\\
azerbaijani-latin\\
azerbaijani-latn\\
azerbaijani\\
bafia\\
bambara\\
basaa\\
basque\\
belarusian\\
bemba\\
bena\\
bengali\\
bodo\\
bosnian-cyrillic\\
bosnian-cyrl\\
bosnian-latin\\
bosnian-latn\\
bosnian\\
brazilian\\
breton\\
british\\
bulgarian\\
burmese\\
canadian\\
cantonese\\
catalan\\
centralatlastamazight\\
centralkurdish\\
chechen\\
cherokee\\
chiga\\
chinese-hans-hk\\
chinese-hans-mo\\
chinese-hans-sg\\
chinese-hans\\
chinese-hant-hk\\
chinese-hant-mo\\
chinese-hant\\
chinese-simplified-hongkongsarchina\\
chinese-simplified-macausarchina\\
chinese-simplified-singapore\\
chinese-simplified\\
chinese-traditional-hongkongsarchina\\
chinese-traditional-macausarchina\\
chinese-traditional\\
chinese\\
colognian\\
cornish\\
croatian\\
czech\\
danish\\
duala\\
dutch\\
dzongkha\\
embu\\
english-au\\
english-australia\\
english-ca\\
english-canada\\
english-gb\\
english-newzealand\\
english-nz\\
english-unitedkingdom\\
english-unitedstates\\
english-us\\
english\\
esperanto\\
estonian\\
ewe\\
ewondo\\
faroese\\
filipino\\
finnish\\
french-be\\
french-belgium\\
french-ca\\
french-canada\\
french-ch\\
french-lu\\
french-luxembourg\\
french-switzerland\\
french\\
friulian\\
fulah\\
galician\\
ganda\\
georgian\\
german-at\\
german-austria\\
german-ch\\
german-switzerland\\
german\\
greek\\
gujarati\\
gusii\\
hausa-gh\\
hausa-ghana\\
hausa-ne\\
hausa-niger\\
hausa\\
hawaiian\\
hebrew\\
hindi\\
hungarian\\
icelandic\\
igbo\\
inarisami\\
indonesian\\
interlingua\\
irish\\
italian\\
japanese\\
jolafonyi\\
kabuverdianu\\
kabyle\\
kako\\
kalaallisut\\
kalenjin\\
kamba\\
kannada\\
kashmiri\\
kazakh\\
khmer\\
kikuyu\\
kinyarwanda\\
konkani\\
korean\\
koyraborosenni\\
koyrachiini\\
kwasio\\
kyrgyz\\
lakota\\
langi\\
lao\\
latvian\\
lingala\\
lithuanian\\
lowersorbian\\
lsorbian\\
lubakatanga\\
luo\\
luxembourgish\\
luyia\\
macedonian\\
machame\\
makhuwameetto\\
makonde\\
malagasy\\
malay-bn\\
malay-brunei\\
malay-sg\\
malay-singapore\\
malay\\
malayalam\\
maltese\\
manx\\
marathi\\
masai\\
mazanderani\\
meru\\
meta\\
mexican\\
mongolian\\
morisyen\\
mundang\\
nama\\
nepali\\
newzealand\\
ngiemboon\\
ngomba\\
norsk\\
northernluri\\
northernsami\\
northndebele\\
norwegianbokmal\\
norwegiannynorsk\\
nswissgerman\\
nuer\\
nyankole\\
nynorsk\\
occitan\\
oriya\\
oromo\\
ossetic\\
pashto\\
persian\\
piedmontese\\
polish\\
portuguese-br\\
portuguese-brazil\\
portuguese-portugal\\
portuguese-pt\\
portuguese\\
punjabi-arab\\
punjabi-arabic\\
punjabi-gurmukhi\\
punjabi-guru\\
punjabi\\
quechua\\
romanian\\
romansh\\
rombo\\
rundi\\
russian\\
rwa\\
sakha\\
samburu\\
samin\\
sango\\
sangu\\
sanskrit-beng\\
sanskrit-bengali\\
sanskrit-deva\\
sanskrit-devanagari\\
sanskrit-gujarati\\
sanskrit-gujr\\
sanskrit-kannada\\
sanskrit-knda\\
sanskrit-malayalam\\
sanskrit-mlym\\
sanskrit-telu\\
sanskrit-telugu\\
sanskrit\\
scottishgaelic\\
sena\\
serbian-cyrillic-bosniaherzegovina\\
serbian-cyrillic-kosovo\\
serbian-cyrillic-montenegro\\
serbian-cyrillic\\
serbian-cyrl-ba\\
serbian-cyrl-me\\
serbian-cyrl-xk\\
serbian-cyrl\\
serbian-latin-bosniaherzegovina\\
serbian-latin-kosovo\\
serbian-latin-montenegro\\
serbian-latin\\
serbian-latn-ba\\
serbian-latn-me\\
serbian-latn-xk\\
serbian-latn\\
serbian\\
shambala\\
shona\\
sichuanyi\\
sinhala\\
slovak\\
slovene\\
slovenian\\
soga\\
somali\\
spanish-mexico\\
spanish-mx\\
spanish\\
standardmoroccantamazight\\
swahili\\
swedish\\
swissgerman\\
tachelhit-latin\\
tachelhit-latn\\
tachelhit-tfng\\
tachelhit-tifinagh\\
tachelhit\\
taita\\
tamil\\
tasawaq\\
telugu\\
teso\\
thai\\
tibetan\\
tigrinya\\
tongan\\
turkish\\
turkmen\\
ukenglish\\
ukrainian\\
uppersorbian\\
urdu\\
usenglish\\
usorbian\\
uyghur\\
uzbek-arab\\
uzbek-arabic\\
uzbek-cyrillic\\
uzbek-cyrl\\
uzbek-latin\\
uzbek-latn\\
uzbek\\
vai-latin\\
vai-latn\\
vai-vai\\
vai-vaii\\
vai\\
vietnam\\
vietnamese\\
vunjo\\
walser\\
welsh\\
westernfrisian\\
yangben\\
yiddish\\
yoruba\\
zarma\\
zulu
﻿afrikaans\\

\end{multicols}
\endgroup
\hrule

\subsection{Selecting fonts}

\New{3.15} Babel provides a high level interface on top of |fontspec|
to select fonts. There is no need to load \textsf{fontspec} explicitly
-- \babel{} does it for you with the first |\babelfont|.\footnote{See
also the package \textsf{combofont} for a complementary approach.}

\Describe\babelfont{\oarg{language-list}\marg{font-family}%
  \oarg{font-options}\marg{font-name}}

Here \textit{font-family} is |rm|, |sf| or |tt| (or newly defined
ones, as explained below), and \textit{font-name} is the same as in
\textsf{fontspec} and the like.

If no language is given, then it is considered the default font for
the family, activated when a language is selected. On the other hand,
if there is one or more languages in the optional argument, the font
will be assigned to them, overriding the default. Alternatively, you
may set a font for a script -- just precede its name (lowercase) with
a star (eg, |*devanagari|).

\Babel{} takes care of the font language and the font script when
languages are selected (as well as the writing direction); see the
recognized languages above. In most cases, you will not need
\textit{font-options}, which is the same as in \textsf{fontspec}, but
you may add further key/value pairs if necessary.

\begin{example}
  Usage in most cases is very simple. Let us assume you are setting up
  a document in Swedish, with some words in Hebrew, with a font suited
  for both languages.
  \begingroup
% If you are looking at the code to see how it has been written, you
% will be disappointed :-). The following example is built ad hoc to
% emulate the final result to avoid dependencies, and therefore it's
% not "real" code.
\setmonofont[Scale=.87,Script=Hebrew]{DejaVu Sans Mono} \catcode`@=13
\def@#1{\ifcase#1\relax \egroup \or \bgroup\textdir TLT \else
\bgroup\textdir TRT \fontspec[Scale=.87,Script=Hebrew]{Liberation
Mono} \fi}
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}

\usepackage[swedish, bidi=default]{babel}

\babelprovide[import=he]{hebrew}

_\babelfont{rm}{FreeSerif}_

\begin{document}

Svenska \foreignlanguage{hebrew}{@2עִבְרִית@0} svenska.

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\endgroup

If on the other hand you have to resort to different fonts, you could
replace the red line above with, say:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelfont{rm}{Iwona}
\babelfont[hebrew]{rm}{FreeSerif}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

|\babelfont| can be used to implicitly define a new font family. Just
write its name instead of |rm|, |sf| or |tt|. This is the preferred way
to select fonts in addition to the three basic ones.

\begin{example}
  Here is how to do it:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelfont{kai}{FandolKai}
\end{verbatim}
  Now, |\kaifamily| and |\kaidefault|, as well as |\textkai| are at
  your disposal.
\end{example}

\begin{note}
  You may load \textsf{fontspec} explicitly. For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\usepackage{fontspec}
\newfontscript{Devanagari}{deva}
\babelfont[hindi]{rm}{Shobhika}
\end{verbatim}
  This makes sure the OpenType script for Devanagari is |deva| and not
  |dev2| (\luatex{} does not detect automatically the correct 
  script\footnote{And even with the correct code some fonts could be 
  rendered incorrectly by \textsf{fontspec}, so double check the 
  results. \xetex{} fares better, but some font are still problematic.}).
\end{note}

\begin{note}
  Directionality is a property affecting margins, intentation, column
  order, etc., not just text. Therefore, it is under the direct
  control of the language, which appplies both the script and the
  direction to the text. As a consequence, there is no need to set
  \texttt{Script} when declaring a font (nor \texttt{Language}). In
  fact, it is even discouraged.
\end{note}

\begin{note}
  |\fontspec| is not touched at all, only the preset font families
  (|rm|, |sf|, |tt|, and the like). If a language is switched when an
  \textit{ad hoc} font is active, or you select the font with this
  command, neither the script nor the language are passed. You must
  add them by hand. This is by design, for several reasons (for
  example, each font has its own set of features and a generic setting
  for several of them could be problematic, and also a “lower level”
  font selection is useful).
\end{note}

\begin{note}
  The keys |Language| and |Script| just pass these values to the
  \textit{font}, and do \textit{not} set the script for the
  \textit{language} (and therefore the writing direction). In other
  words, the |ini| file or |\babelprovide| provides default values for
  |\babelfont| if omitted, but the opposite is not true. See the note
  above for the reasons of this behavior.
\end{note}

\begin{warning}
  Do not use |\set|\textit{xxxx}|font| and |\babelfont| at the same
  time.  |\babelfont| follows the standard \LaTeX{} conventions to set
  the basic families -- define |\|\textit{xx}|default|, and activate
  it with |\|\textit{xx}|family|. On the other hand,
  |\set|\textit{xxxx}|font| in \textsf{fontspec} takes a different
  approach, because |\|\textit{xx}|family| is redefined with the
  family name hardcoded (so that |\|\textit{xx}|default| becomes
  no-op). Of course, both methods are incompatible, and if you use
  |\set|\textit{xxxx}|font|, font switching with |\babelfont| just
  does \textit{not} work (nor the standard |\|\textit{xx}|default|,
  for that matter).
\end{warning}

\subsection{Modifying a language}

Modifying the behavior of a language (say, the chapter “caption”), is
sometimes necessary, but not always trivial.
\begin{itemize}
\item The old way, still valid for many languages, to redefine a
  caption is the following:
\begin{verbatim}
\addto\captionsenglish{%
  \renewcommand\contentsname{Foo}%
}
\end{verbatim}
As of 3.15, there is no need to hide spaces with \texttt{\%%
} (\babel{} removes them), but it is advisable to do it.
\item The new way, which is found in |bulgarian|, |azerbaijani|,
  |spanish|, |french|, |turkish|, |icelandic|, |vietnamese| and a few
  more, as well as in languages created with |\babelprovide| and its
  key |import|, is:
\begin{verbatim}
\renewcommand\spanishchaptername{Foo}
\end{verbatim}
\item Macros to be run when a language is selected can be add to
  |\extras|\m{lang}:
\begin{verbatim}
\addto\extrasrussian{\mymacro}
\end{verbatim}
There is a counterpart for code to be run when a language is
unselected: |\noextras|\m{lang}.
\end{itemize}

\begin{note}
  These macros (|\captions|\m{lang}, |\extras|\m{lang}) may be redefined, but
  must not be used as such -- they just pass information to \babel{},
  which executes them in the proper context.
\end{note}

\subsection{Creating a language}

\New{3.10} And what if there is no style for your language or none
fits your needs? You may then define quickly a language with the
help of the following macro in the preamble.

\Describe{\babelprovide}{\oarg{options}\marg{language-name}}

Defines the internal structure of the language with some defaults: the
hyphen rules, if not available, are set to the current ones, left and
right hyphen mins are set to 2 and 3, but captions and date are not
defined. Conveniently, \babel{} warns you about what to do. Very
likely you will find alerts like that in the |log| file:
\begin{verbatim}
Package babel Warning: \mylangchaptername not set. Please, define
(babel)                it in the preamble with something like:
(babel)                \renewcommand\maylangchaptername{..}
(babel)                Reported on input line 18.
\end{verbatim}

In most cases, you will only need to define a few macros.

\begin{example}
  If you need a language named |arhinish|:
\begin{verbatim}
\usepackage[danish]{babel}
\babelprovide{arhinish}
\renewcommand\arhinishchaptername{Chapitula}
\renewcommand\arhinishrefname{Refirenke}
\renewcommand\arhinishhyphenmins{22}
\end{verbatim}
\end{example}

The main language is not changed (\texttt{danish} in this example).
So, you must add |\selectlanguage{arhinish}| or other selectors where
necessary.

If the language has been loaded as an argument in |\documentclass| or
|\usepackage|, then |\babelprovide| redefines the requested data.

\Describe{import=}{\meta{language-tag}}
\New{3.13} Imports data from an |ini| file, including captions, date,
and hyphenmins. For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelprovide[import=hu]{hungarian}
\end{verbatim}
Unicode engines load the UTF-8 variants, while 8-bit engines load the
LICR (ie, with macros like |\'| or |\ss|) ones.

There are about 200 |ini| files, with data taken from the |ldf| files
and the CLDR provided by Unicode. Not all languages in the latter are
complete, and therefore neither are the |ini| files. A few languages
will show a warning about the current lack of suitability of the date
format (\textsf{hindi}, \textsf{french}, \textsf{breton}, and
\textsf{occitan}).

Besides |\today|, there is a |\<language>date| macro with three
arguments: year, month and day numbers. In fact, |\today| calls
|\<language>today|, which in turn calls
|\<language>date{\the\year}{\the\month}{\the\day}|.

\Describe{captions=}{\meta{language-tag}}
Loads only the strings. For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelprovide[captions=hu]{hungarian}
\end{verbatim}

\Describe{hyphenrules=}{\meta{language-list}} With this option, with a
space-separated list of hyphenation rules, \babel{} assigns to the
language the first valid hyphenation rules in the list. For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelprovide[hyphenrules=chavacano spanish italian]{chavacano}
\end{verbatim}
If none of the listed hyphenrules exist, the default behavior
applies. Note in this example we set |chavacano| as first option --
without it, it would select |spanish| even if |chavacano| exists.

A special value is |+|, which allocates a new language (in the \TeX{}
sense). It only makes sense as the last value (or the only one; the
subsequent ones are silently ignored). It is mostly useful with
\luatex, because you can add some patterns with |\babelpatterns|, as
for example:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelprovide[hyphenrules=+]{neo}
\babelpatterns[neo]{a1 e1 i1 o1 u1}
\end{verbatim}
In other engines it just supresses hyphenation (because the pattern
list is empty).

\Describe{main}{} This valueless option makes the language the main
one. Only in newly defined languages.

\Describe{script=}{\meta{script-name}} \New{3.15} Sets the script name
to be used by \textsf{fontspec} (eg, |Devanagari|). Overrides the
value in the |ini| file. This value is particularly important because
it sets the writing direction.

\Describe{language=}{\meta{language-name}} \New{3.15} Sets the
language name to be used by \textsf{fontspec} (eg, |Hindi|). Overrides
the value in the |ini| file. Not so important, but sometimes still
relevant.

\begin{note}
  (1) If you need shorthands, you can use |\useshorthands| and
  |\defineshorthand| as described above. (2) Captions and |\today| are
  ``ensured'' with |\babelensure| (this is be the default in
  |ini|-based languages).
\end{note}

\subsection{Digits}

\New{3.20} A few |ini| files define a field named |digits.native|. When
it is present, two macros are created: |\<language>digits| and
|\<language>counter| (only \xetex{} and \luatex{}). With the first, a
string of ‘Latin’ digits are converted to the native digits of that
language; the second takes a counter name as argument. With option
|maparabic| in |\babelprovide|, |\arabic| is redefined to produce the
native digits (this is done \textit{globally}, to avoid inconsistencies
in, for example, page numbering).

For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelprovide[import=te]{telugu}  % Telugu better with XeTeX
  % Or also, if you want:
  % \babelprovide[import=te, maparabic]{telugu}
\babelfont{rm}{Gautami}
\begin{document}
\telugudigits{1234}
\telugucounter{section}
\end{document}
\end{verbatim}

Languages providing native digits in all or some variants are
\textit{ar, as, bn, bo, brx, ckb, dz, fa, gu, hi, km, kn, kok, ks, lo,
lrc, ml, mr, my, mzn, ne, or, pa, ps, ta, te, th, ug, ur, uz, vai, yue,
zh.}

\subsection{Getting the current language name}

\Describe{\languagename}{}
The control sequence |\languagename| contains the name of the
current language.

\begin{warning}
  Due to some internal inconsistencies in catcodes, it should
  \textit{not} be used to test its value. Use \textsf{iflang}, by
  Heiko Oberdiek.
\end{warning}

\Describe{\iflanguage}{\marg{language}\marg{true}\marg{false}}

If more than one language is used, it might be necessary to know which
language is active at a specific time. This can be checked by a call
to |\iflanguage|, but note here ``language'' is used in the \TeX\
sense, as a set of hyphenation patterns, and \textit{not} as its
\textsf{babel} name. This macro takes three arguments.  The first
argument is the name of a language; the second and third arguments are
the actions to take if the result of the test is true or false
respectively.

\begin{warning}
  The advice about |\languagename| also applies here -- use
  \textsf{iflang} instead of |\iflanguage| if possible.
\end{warning}

\subsection{Hyphenation tools}

\Describe{\babelhyphen}{%
  \colorbox{thegrey}{\ttfamily\hskip-.2em*\hskip-.2em}\marg{type}}
\DescribeOther\babelhyphen{%
  \colorbox{thegrey}{\ttfamily\hskip-.2em*\hskip-.2em}\marg{text}}

\New{3.9a} It is customary to classify hyphens in two types: (1)
\textit{explicit} or \textit{hard hyphens}, which in \TeX\ are
entered as \verb|-|, and (2) \textit{optional} or \textit{soft
hyphens}, which are entered as \verb|\-|. Strictly, a \textit{soft
hyphen} is not a hyphen, but just a breaking oportunity or, in
\TeX\ terms, a ``discretionary''; a \textit{hard hyphen} is a hyphen
with a breaking oportunity after it. A further type is a
\textit{non-breaking hyphen}, a hyphen without a breaking
oportunity.

In \TeX, \verb|-| and \verb|\-| forbid further breaking oportunities
in the word. This is the desired behavior very often, but not always,
and therefore many languages provide shorthands for these
cases. Unfortunately, this has not been done consistently: for
example, \verb|"-| in Dutch, Portugese, Catalan or Danish is a hard
hyphen, while in German, Spanish, Norwegian, Slovak or Russian is a
soft hyphen. Furthermore, some of them even redefine |\-|, so that you
cannot insert a soft hyphen without breaking oportunities in the rest
of the word.

Therefore, some macros are provide with a set of basic ``hyphens''
which can be used by themselves, to define a user shorthand, or even
in language files.
\begin{itemize}
\item |\babelhyphen{soft}| and |\babelhyphen{hard}| are self
  explanatory.
\item |\babelhyphen{repeat}| inserts a hard hyphen which is repeated
  at the beginning of the next line, as done in languages like
  Polish, Portugese and Spanish.
\item |\babelhyphen{nobreak}| inserts a hard hyphen without a break
  after it (even if a space follows).
\item |\babelhyphen{empty}| inserts a break oportunity without
  a hyphen at all.
\item |\babelhyphen|\marg{text} is a hard ``hyphen'' using \m{text}
  instead. A typical case is |\babelhyphen{/}|.
\end{itemize}
With all of them hyphenation in the rest of the word is enabled. If
you don't want enabling it, there is a starred counterpart:
|\babelhyphen*{soft}| (which in most cases is equivalent to the
original |\-|), |\babelhyphen*{hard}|, etc.

Note |hard| is also good for isolated prefixes (eg, \textit{anti-})
and |nobreak| for isolated suffixes (eg, \textit{-ism}), but in both
cases |\babelhyphen*{nobreak}| is usually better.

There are also some differences with \LaTeX: (1) the character used is
that set for the current font, while in \LaTeX{} it is hardwired to
|-| (a typical value); (2) the hyphen to be used in fonts with a
negative |\hyphenchar| is  |-|, like in \LaTeX, but it can be changed to
another value by redefining |\babelnullhyphen|; (3) a break after the
hyphen is forbidden if preceded by a glue ${>}0$~pt (at the beginning
of a word, provided it is not immediately preceded by, say, a
parenthesis).

\Describe\babelhyphenation{\texttt{[}\langlist\texttt{]}%
    \marg{exceptions}}

\New{3.9a} Sets hyphenation exceptions for the languages given
or, without the optional argument, for \textit{all} languages (eg,
proper nouns or common loan words, and of course monolingual
documents). Language exceptions take precedence over global ones.

It can be used only in the preamble, and exceptions are set when the
language is first selected, thus taking into account changes of
|\lccodes|'s done in |\extras|\m{lang} as well as the language specific
encoding (not set in the preamble by default). Multiple
|\babelhyphenation|'s are allowed. For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\babelhyphenation{Wal-hal-la Dar-bhan-ga}
\end{verbatim}

Listed words are saved expanded and therefore it relies on the
LICR. Of course, it also works without the LICR if the input and the
font encodings are the same, like in Unicode based engines.

\Describe\babelpatterns{\texttt{[}\langlist\texttt{]}%
    \marg{patterns}}

\New{3.9m} \textit{In \textsf{luatex} only},\footnote{With
\textsf{luatex} exceptions and patterns can be modified almost
freely. However, this is very likely a task for a separate package
and \texttt{babel} only provides the most basic tools.} adds or
replaces patterns for the languages given or, without the optional
argument, for \textit{all} languages. If a pattern for a certain
combination already exists, it gets replaced by the new one.

It can be used only in the preamble, and patterns are added when the
language is first selected, thus taking into account changes of
|\lccodes|'s done in |\extras|\m{lang} as well as the language specific
encoding (not set in the preamble by default). Multiple
|\babelpatterns|'s are allowed.

Listed patterns are saved expanded and therefore it relies on the
LICR. Of course, it also works without the LICR if the input and the
font encodings are the same, like in Unicode based engines.

\subsection{Selecting scripts}

Currently \babel{} provides no standard interface to select
scripts, because they are best selected with either |\fontencoding|
(low level) or a language name (high level). Even the Latin script may
require different encodings (ie, sets of glyphs) depending on the
language, and therefore such a switch would be in a sense
incomplete.\footnote{The so-called Unicode fonts do not improve the
situation either. So, a font suited for Vietnamese is not necessarily
suited for, say, the romanization of Indic languages, and the fact it
contains glyphs for Modern Greek does not mean it includes them for
Classic Greek.}

Some languages sharing the same script define macros to switch it (eg,
|\textcyrillic|), but be aware they may also set the language to a
certain default. Even the \babel{} core defined |\textlatin|, but is
was somewhat buggy because in some cases it messed up encodings and
fonts (for example, if the main latin encoding was |LY1|), and
therefore it has been deprecated.\footnote{But still defined for
backwards compatibility.}

\Describe{\ensureascii}{\marg{text}}

\New{3.9i} This macro makes sure \m{text} is typeset with a
LICR-savvy encoding in the ASCII range. It is used to redefine |\TeX|
and |\LaTeX| so that they are correctly typeset even with |LGR| or
|X2| (the complete list is stored in |\BabelNonASCII|, which by default
is |LGR|, |X2|, |OT2|, |OT3|, |OT6|, |LHE|, |LWN|, |LMA|, |LMC|,
|LMS|, |LMU|, but you can modify it). So, in some sense it fixes the
bug described in the previous paragraph.

If non-ASCII encodings are not loaded (or no encoding at all), it is
no-op (also |\TeX| and |\LaTeX| are not redefined); otherwise,
|\ensureascii| switches to the encoding at the beginning of the
document if ASCII-savvy, or else the last ASCII-savvy encoding
loaded. For example, if you load |LY1,LGR|, then it is set to |LY1|,
but if you load |LY1,T2A| it is set to |T2A|. The symbol encodings
|TS1|, |T3|, and |TS3| are not taken into account, since they are not
used for ``ordinary'' text.

The foregoing rules (which are applied ``at begin document'') cover
most of cases. No asumption is made on characters above
127, which may not follow the LICR conventions -- the goal is just
to ensure most of the ASCII letters and symbols are the right ones.

\subsection{Selecting directions}
\label{bidi}

No macros to select the writing direction are provided, either --
writing direction is intrinsic to each script and therefore it is best
set by the language (which could be a dummy one). Furthermore, there
are in fact two right-to-left modes, depending on the language, which
differ in the way `weak' numeric characters are ordered (eg, Arabic
\%123 \textit{vs} Hebrew 123\%).

\begin{warning}
  Setting bidi text has many subtleties (see for example
  <https://www.w3.org/TR/html-bidi/>). \textit{This means the \babel{}
  bidi code may take some time before it is truly stable.}\footnote{A
  basic stable version for \luatex{} is planned before (Northern)
  Summer 2018. Other engines must wait very likely until (Northern)
  Winter.} \textit{This is particularly true for graphical elements,
  including the |picture| environment and PDF or PS based graphics.}

  An effort is being made to avoid incompatibilities in the future
  (this one of the reason currently bidi must be explicitly requested
  as a package option, with a certain bidi model, and also the |layout|
  options described below).
\end{warning}

There are some package options controlling bidi writing.

\Describe{bidi=}{\texttt{default} $\string|$ \texttt{basic-r}
  $\string|$ \texttt{basic}}

\New{3.14} Selects the bidi algorithm to be used. With |default| the
bidi mechanism is just activated (by default it is not), but every
change must by marked up. In \xetex{} and \pdftex{} this is the only
option. In \luatex, |basic-r| provides a simple and fast method for R
text, which handles numbers and unmarked L text within an R context.
\New{3.19} Finally, |basic| suports both L and R text (see
\ref{bidibasic}). (They are named \texttt{basic} mainly because they
only consider the intrinsic direction of scripts and weak
directionality.)

\begin{example}
  The following text comes from the Arabic Wikipedia (article about
  Arabia). Copy-pasting some text from the Wikipedia is a good way to
  test this feature, which will be improved in the future. Remember
  |basic-r| is available in \luatex{} only.\footnote{At the time of
  this writing some Arabic fonts are not rendered correctly by the
  default \luatex{} font loader, with misplaced kerns inside some
  words, so double check the resulting text. It seems a fix is on the
  way, but in the meanwhile you could have a look at the workaround
  available on GitHub, under \texttt{/required/babel/samples}}
  \begingroup
% If you are looking at the code to see how it has been written, you
% will be disappointed :-). The following example is built ad hoc to
% emulate the final result to avoid dependencies, and therefore it's
% not "real" code.
\setmonofont[Scale=.87,Script=Arabic]{DejaVu Sans Mono} \catcode`@=13
\def@#1{\ifcase#1\relax \egroup \or \bgroup\textdir TLT \else
\bgroup\textdir TRT \pardir TRT \fi}
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}

\usepackage[_bidi=basic-r_]{babel}

_\babelprovide[import=ar, main]{arabic}_

\babelfont{rm}{FreeSerif}

\begin{document}

@9وقد عرفت شبه جزيرة العرب طيلة العصر الهيليني )الاغريقي( بـ
@1Arabia@0 أو @1Aravia@0 )بالاغريقية @1Αραβία@0(، استخدم الرومان ثلاث
بادئات بـ@1“Arabia”@0 على ثلاث مناطق من شبه الجزيرة العربية، إلا أنها
حقيقةً كانت أكبر مما تعرف عليه اليوم.

@0\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\endgroup
\end{example}

\Describe{layout=}{\texttt{sectioning} $\string|$
                   \texttt{counters}  $\string|$
                   \texttt{lists}  $\string|$
                   \texttt{contents}  $\string|$
                   \texttt{footnotes}  $\string|$
                   \texttt{captions}  $\string|$
                   \texttt{columns} $\string|$
                   \texttt{extras}}

\New{3.16} \textit{To be expanded}. Selects which layout elements are
adapted in bidi documents, including some text elements. You may use
several options with a comma-separated list (eg,
|layout=counters.contents.sectioning|). This list will be expanded in
future releases (tables, captions, etc.). Note not all options are
required by all engines.

\begin{description}
\renewcommand\makelabel[1]{%
  \hspace\labelsep\normalfont\ttfamily\color{thered}#1}
\itemsep=-\parskip

\item[sectioning] makes sure the sectioning macros are typeset in the
  main language, but with the title text in the current language (see
  below |\BabelPatchSection| for further details).

\item[counters] required in all engines (except \luatex{} with
  |bidi=basic|) to reorder section numbers and the like (eg,
  \m{subsection}.\m{section}); required in \xetex{} and \pdftex{} for
  counters in general, as well as in \luatex{} with |bidi=default|;
  required in \luatex{} for numeric footnote marks $>$9 with
  |bidi=basic-r| (but \textit{not} with |bidi=basic|); note, however,
  it could depend on the counter format.

  With |counters|, |\arabic| is not only considered L text always (with
  |\babelsublr|, see below), but also an ``isolated'' block which does
  not interact with the surrounding chars. So, while |1.2| in R text is
  rendered in that order with |bidi=basic| (as a decimal number), in
  |\arabic{c1}.\arabic{c2}| the visual order is \textit{c2.c1}. Of
  course, you may always adjust the order by changing the language, if
  necessary.\footnote{Next on the roadmap are counters and numeral
  systems in general. Expect some minor readjustments.}

\item[lists] required in \xetex{} and \pdftex{}, but only in
  multilingual documents in \luatex{}.

\item[contents] required in \xetex{} and \pdftex{}; in \luatex{}
  toc entries are R by default if the main language is R.

\item[columns] required in \xetex{} and \pdftex{} to reverse the
  column order (currently only the standard two column mode); in
  \luatex{} they are R by default if the main language is R (including
  \textsf{multicol}).

\item[footnotes] not required in monolingual documents, but it may be
  useful in multilingual documents in all engines; you may use
  alternatively |\BabelFootnote| described below (what this options
  does exactly is also explained there).

\item[captions] is similar to |sectioning|, but for |\caption|; not
  required in monolingual documents with \luatex{}, but may be
  required in \xetex{} and \pdftex{} in some styles (support for the
  latter two engines is still experimental) \New{3.18}.

\item[tabular] required in \luatex{} for R |tabular| (it has been
  tested only with simple tables, so expect some readjustments in the
  future); ignored in \pdftex{} or \xetex{} (which will not support a
  similar option in the short term) \New{3.18},

\item[extras] is used for miscelaneous readjustments which do not fit into
  the previous groups. Currently redefines in \luatex{} |\underline| and
  |LaTeX2e| \New{3.19}.
\end{description}

\Describe{\babelsublr}{\marg{lr-text}}

Digits in \pdftex{} must be marked up explicitly (unlike \luatex{} with
|bidi=basic-r| and, usually, \xetex{}). This command is provided to set
\marg{lr-text} in L mode if necessary. It's intended for what Unicode
calls weak characters, because words are best set with the
corresponding language. For this reason, there is no |rl| counterpart.

Any |\babelsublr| in \textit{explicit} L mode is ignored. However, with
|bidi=basic| and \textit{implicit} L, it first returns to R and then
switches to explicit L. This is by design to provide the proper behaviour
in the most usual cases — but if you need to use |\ref| in an L text
inside R, it must be marked up explictly.

\Describe{\BabelPatchSection}{\marg{section-name}}

Mainly for bidi text, but it could be useful in other
cases. |\BabelPatchSection| and the corresponding option
|layout=sectioning| takes a more logical approach (at least in many
cases) because it applies the global language to the section format
(including the |\chaptername| in |\chapter|), while the section text
is still the current language. The latter is passed to tocs and marks,
too, and with |sectioning| in |layout| they both reset the “global”
language to the main one, while the text uses the “local”
language

With |layout=sectioning| all the standard sectioning
commands are redefined, but with this command you can set them
individually if necessary (but note then tocs and marks are not
touched).

\Describe{\BabelFootnote}{\marg{cmd}\marg{local-language}%
  \marg{before}\marg{after}}

\New{3.17} Something like:
\begin{verbatim}
\BabelFootnote{\parsfootnote}{\languagename}{(}{)}
\end{verbatim}
defines |\parsfootnote| so that |\parsfootnote{note}| is equivalent to:
\begin{verbatim}
\footnote{(\foreignlanguage{\languagename}{note})}
\end{verbatim}
but the footnote itself is typeset in the main language (to unify its
direction). In addition, |\parsfootnotetext| is defined. The option
|footnotes| just does the following:
\begin{verbatim}
\BabelFootnote{\footnote}{\languagename}{}{}%
\BabelFootnote{\localfootnote}{\languagename}{}{}%
\BabelFootnote{\mainfootnote}{}{}{}
\end{verbatim}
(which also redefine |\footnotetext| and define |\localfootnotetext|
and |\mainfootnotetext|). If the language argument is empty, then no
language is selected inside the argument of the footnote. Note this
command is available always in bidi documents, even without
|layout=footnotes|.

\begin{example}
  If you want to preserve directionality in footnotes and there are
  many footnotes entirely in English, you can define:
\begin{verbatim}
\BabelFootnote{\enfootnote}{english}{}{.}
\end{verbatim}
  It adds a period outside the English part, so that it is placed
  at the left in the last line. This means the dot the end of the
  footnote text should be omitted.
\end{example}

\subsection{Language attributes}

\DescribeMacro{\languageattribute}
This is a user-level command, to be used in the preamble of a
document (after |\usepackage[...]{babel}|), that declares which
attributes are to be used for a given language. It takes two
arguments: the first is the name of the language; the second,
a (list of) attribute(s) to be used. Attributes must be set in the
preamble and only once -- they cannot be turned on and off.
The command checks whether the language is known in this document
and whether the attribute(s) are known for this language.

Very often, using a \textit{modifier} in a package option is better.

Several language definition files use their own methods to set
options. For example, \textsf{french} uses |\frenchsetup|,
\textsf{magyar} (1.5) uses |\magyarOptions|; modifiers provided by
|spanish| have no attribute counterparts. Macros settting
options are also used (eg, |\ProsodicMarksOn| in \textsf{latin}).

\subsection{Hooks}

\New{3.9a} A hook is a piece of code to be executed at certain
events. Some hooks are predefined when \luatex{} and \xetex{} are
used.

\Describe\AddBabelHook{\marg{name}\marg{event}\marg{code}}

The same name can be applied to several events.  Hooks may be enabled
and disabled for all defined events with
|\EnableBabelHook|\marg{name}, |\DisableBabelHook|\marg{name}. Names
containing the string |babel| are reserved (they are used, for
example, by |\useshortands*| to add a hook for the event
|afterextras|).

Current events are the following; in some of them you can use one to
three \TeX{} parameters (|#1|, |#2|, |#3|), with the meaning given:
\begin{description}
\renewcommand\makelabel[1]{%
  \hspace\labelsep\normalfont\ttfamily\color{thered}#1}
\itemsep=-\parskip
\item[adddialect] (language name, dialect name) Used by
  \file{luababel.def} to load the patterns if not preloaded.
\item[patterns] (language name, language with encoding) Executed just
  after the |\language| has been set. The second argument has the
  patterns name actually selected (in the form of either |lang:ENC| or
  |lang|).
\item[hyphenation] (language name, language with encoding) Executed
  locally just before exceptions given in |\babelhyphenation| are
  actually set.
\item[defaultcommands] Used (locally) in |\StartBabelCommands|.
\item[encodedcommands] (input, font encodings) Used (locally) in
  |\StartBabelCommands|. Both \xetex{} and \luatex{} make sure the
  encoded text is read correctly.
\item[stopcommands] Used to reset the the above, if necessary.
\item[write] This event comes just after the switching commands are
  written to the |aux| file.
\item[beforeextras] Just before executing |\extras|\m{language}. This
  event and the next one should not contain language-dependent code
  (for that, add it to |\extras|\m{language}).
\item[afterextras] Just after executing |\extras|\m{language}. For
  example, the following deactivates shorthands in all languages:
\begin{verbatim}
\AddBabelHook{noshort}{afterextras}{\languageshorthands{none}}
\end{verbatim}
\item[stringprocess] Instead of a parameter, you can manipulate the
  macro |\BabelString| containing the string to be defined with
  |\SetString|. For example, to use an expanded version of the string
  in the definition, write:
\begin{verbatim}
\AddBabelHook{myhook}{stringprocess}{%
  \protected@edef\BabelString{\BabelString}}
\end{verbatim}
\item[initiateactive] (char as active, char as other, original char)
  \New{3.9i} Executed just after a shorthand has been `initiated'. The three
  parameters are the same character with different catcodes: active,
  other (|\string|'ed) and the original one.
\item[afterreset] \New{3.9i} Executed when selecting a language just after
  |\originalTeX| is run and reset to its base value, before executing
  |\captions|\m{language} and |\date|\m{language}.
\end{description}

Four events are used in \file{hyphen.cfg}, which are handled in a
quite different way for efficiency reasons -- unlike the precedent
ones, they only have a single hook and replace a default definition.
\begin{description}
\renewcommand\makelabel[1]{%
  \hspace\labelsep\normalfont\ttfamily\color{thered}#1}
\itemsep=-\parskip
\item[everylanguage] (language) Executed before every language patterns
  are loaded.
\item[loadkernel] (file) By default loads |switch.def|. It can be used
  to load a different version of this files or to load nothing.
\item[loadpatterns] (patterns file) Loads the patterns file. Used by
  \file{luababel.def}.
\item[loadexceptions] (exceptions file) Loads the exceptions
  file. Used by \file{luababel.def}.
\end{description}

\Describe\BabelContentsFiles{}
\New{3.9a} This macro contains a list of ``toc'' types
requiring a command to switch the language. Its default value is
|toc,lof,lot|, but you may redefine it with |\renewcommand| (it's up
to you to make sure no toc type is duplicated).

\subsection{Languages supported by \babel}

In the following table most of the languages supported by \babel{} with
and |.ldf| file are listed, together with the names of the option which
you can load \babel\ with for each language. Note this list is open and
the current options may be different. It does not include |ini| files.

\begin{description}
\itemsep=-\parskip
\sffamily
\item[Afrikaans] afrikaans
\item[Azerbaijani] azerbaijani
\item[Basque] basque
\item[Breton] breton
\item[Bulgarian] bulgarian
\item[Catalan] catalan
\item[Croatian] croatian
\item[Czech] czech
\item[Danish] danish
\item[Dutch] dutch
\item[English] english, USenglish, american, UKenglish,
     british, canadian, australian, newzealand
\item[Esperanto] esperanto
\item[Estonian] estonian
\item[Finnish] finnish
\item[French] french, francais, canadien, acadian
\item[Galician] galician
\item[German] austrian, german, germanb, ngerman, naustrian
\item[Greek] greek, polutonikogreek
\item[Hebrew] hebrew
\item[Icelandic] icelandic
\item[Indonesian] bahasa, indonesian, indon, bahasai
\item[Interlingua] interlingua
\item[Irish Gaelic] irish
\item[Italian] italian
\item[Latin] latin
\item[Lower Sorbian] lowersorbian
\item[Malay] bahasam, malay, melayu
\item[North Sami] samin
\item[Norwegian] norsk, nynorsk
\item[Polish] polish
\item[Portuguese] portuges, portuguese, brazilian, brazil
\item[Romanian] romanian
\item[Russian] russian
\item[Scottish Gaelic] scottish
\item[Spanish]  spanish
\item[Slovakian] slovak
\item[Slovenian]  slovene
\item[Swedish] swedish
\item[Serbian] serbian
\item[Turkish] turkish
\item[Ukrainian] ukrainian
\item[Upper Sorbian] uppersorbian
\item[Welsh] welsh
\end{description}

There are more languages not listed above, including \textsf{hindi,
thai, thaicjk, latvian, turkmen, magyar, mongolian, romansh,
lithuanian, spanglish, vietnamese, japanese, pinyin, arabic, farsi,
ibygreek, bgreek, serbianc, frenchle, ethiop} and \textsf{friulan}.

Most of them work out of the box, but some may require extra fonts,
encoding files, a preprocessor or even a complete framework (like
CJK).  For example, if you have got the \textsf{velthuis/devnag} package,
you can create a file with extension |.dn|:
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[hindi]{babel}
\begin{document}
{\dn devaanaa.m priya.h}
\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
Then you preprocess it with |devnag| \m{file}, which creates
\m{file}|.tex|; you can then typeset the latter with \LaTeX.

\subsection{Tips, workarounds, know issues and notes}

\begin{itemize}
\item If you use the document class \cls{book} \emph{and} you use
  |\ref| inside the argument of |\chapter| (or just use |\ref| inside
  |\MakeUppercase|), \LaTeX\ will keep complaining about an undefined
  label.  To prevent such problems, you could revert to using
  uppercase labels, you can use |\lowercase{\ref{foo}}| inside the
  argument of |\chapter|, or, if you will not use shorthands in
  labels, set the |safe| option to |none| or |bib|.

\item\catcode`\|=12\relax Both \textsf{ltxdoc} and \textsf{babel} use
  \verb|\AtBeginDocument| to change some catcodes, and babel reloads
  \textsf{hhline} to make sure \verb|:| has the right one, so if you
  want to change the catcode of \verb/|/ it has to be done using the
  same method at the proper place, with
\begin{verbatim}
\AtBeginDocument{\DeleteShortVerb{\|}}
\end{verbatim}
  \textit{before} loading babel. This way, when the document begins
  the sequence is (1) make \verb/|/ active (\textsf{ltxdoc}); (2) make
  it unactive (your settings); (3) make babel shorthands active
  (\textsf{babel)}; (4) reload \textsf{hhline} (\textsf{babel}, now
  with the correct catcodes for \verb/|/ and
  \verb|:|).\catcode`\|=\active

\item Documents with several input encodings are not frequent, but
  sometimes are useful. You can set different encodings for different
  languages as the following example shows:
\begin{verbatim}
\addto\extrasfrench{\inputencoding{latin1}}
\addto\extrasrussian{\inputencoding{koi8-r}}
\end{verbatim}
   (A recent version of \textsf{inputenc} is required.)
 \item For the hyphenation to work correctly, lccodes cannot change,
   because \TeX{} only takes into account the values when the
   paragraph is hyphenated, i.e., when it has been
   finished.\footnote{This explains why \LaTeX{} assumes the lowercase
   mapping of T1 and does not provide a tool for multiple
   mappings. Unfortunately, \cs{savinghyphcodes} is not a solution
   either, because lccodes for hyphenation are frozen in the format
   and cannot be changed.} So, if you write a chunk of French text
   with |\foreinglanguage|, the apostrophes might not be taken into
   account. This is a limitation of \TeX, not of
   \babel. Alternatively, you may use |\useshorthands| to activate |'|
   and |\defineshorthand|, or redefine |\textquoteright| (the latter
   is called by the non-ASCII right quote).
\item \verb|\bibitem| is out of sync with \verb|\selectlanguage| in
  the \file{.aux} file. The reason is \verb|\bibitem| uses
  \verb|\immediate| (and others, in fact), while
  \verb|\selectlanguage| doesn't. There is no known workaround.
\item Babel does not take into account |\normalsfcodes| and
  (non-)French spacing is not always properly (un)set by
  languages. However, problems are unlikely to happen and therefore
  this part remains untouched in version 3.9 (but it is in the `to
  do' list).
\item Using a character mathematically active (ie, with math code
  |"8000|) as a shorthand can make \TeX{} enter in an infinite loop in
  some rare cases. (Another issue in the `to do' list, although there
  is a partial solution.)
\end{itemize}

The following packages can be useful, too (the list is still
far from complete):
\begin{description}
\itemsep=-\parskip
\item[csquotes] Logical markup for quotes.
\item[iflang] Tests correctly the current language.
\item[hyphsubst] Selects a different set of patterns for a language.
\item[translator] An open platform for packages that need to be
  localized.
\item[siunitx] Typesetting of numbers and physical quantities.
\item[biblatex] Programmable bibliographies and citations.
\item[bicaption] Bilingual captions.
\item[babelbib] Multilingual bibliographies.
\item[microtype] Adjusts the typesetting according to
some languages (kerning and spacing). Ligatures can be disabled.
\item[substitutefont] Combines fonts in several encodings.
\item[mkpattern] Generates hyphenation patterns.
\item[tracklang] Tracks which languages have been requested.
\item[ucharclasses] (\xetex) Switches fonts when you switch from one
  Unicode block to another.
\item[zhspacing] Spacing for CJK documents in \xetex.
\end{description}

\subsection{Current and future work}

Current work is focused on the so-called complex scripts in \luatex{}.
In 8-bit engines, \babel{} provided a basic support for bidi text as part
of the style for Hebrew, but it is somewhat unsatisfactory and
internally replaces some hardwired commands by other hardwired
commands (generic changes would be much better).

It is possible now to typeset Arabic or Hebrew with numbers and L
text.  Next on the roadmap are line breaking in Thai and the like,
as well as “non-European” digits. Also on the roadmap are R layouts
(lists, footnotes, tables, column order), page and section numbering,
and maybe kashida justification.

As to Thai line breaking, here is the basic idea of what \luatex{} can
do for us, with the Thai patterns and a little script (the final
version will not be so little, of course). It replaces each
discretionary by the equivalent to ZWJ.

\begingroup
\catcode`\_=13 \def_{\string_}
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{article}

\usepackage{babel}

\babelprovide[import=th, main]{thai}

\babelfont{rm}{FreeSerif}

\directlua{
local GLYF = node.id'glyph'
function insertsp (head)
  local size = 0
  for item in node.traverse(head) do
    local i = item.id
    if i == GLYF then
      f = font.getfont(item.font)
      size = f.size
    elseif i == 7 then
      local n = node.new(12, 0)
      node.setglue(n, 0, size * 1) % 1 is a factor
      node.insert_before(head, item, n)
      node.remove(head, item)
    end
  end
end

luatexbase.add_to_callback('hyphenate',
  function (head, tail)
    lang.hyphenate(head)
    insertsp(head)
  end, 'insertsp')
}

\begin{document}

(Thai text.)

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\endgroup

Useful additions would be, for example, time, currency, addresses and
personal names.\footnote{See for example POSIX, ISO 14652 and the
Unicode Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR). Those system, however,
have limited application to \TeX\ because their aim is just to display
information and not fine typesetting.}. But that is the easy
part, because they don't require modifying the \LaTeX{} internals.

Also interesting are differences in the sentence structure or related
to it. For example, in Basque the number precedes the name (including
chapters), in Hungarian ``from (1)'' is ``(1)-b\H{o}l'', but ``from
(3)'' is ``(3)-b\'{o}l'', in Spanish an item labelled
``3.$^{\textrm{\scriptsize o}}$'' may be referred to as either
``\'{\i}tem 3.$^{\textrm{\scriptsize o}}$'' or
``3.$^{\textrm{\scriptsize er}}$ \'{\i}tem'', and so on.

\subsection{Tentative and experimental code}
\label{bidibasic}

\textbf{Option \texttt{bidi=basic}}

\New{3.19} With this package option \textit{both} L and R text can be
mixed without explicit markup (the latter will be only necessary in
some special cases where the Unicode algorithm fails). It is used much
like |bidi=basic-r|, but with R text inside L text you may want to map
the font so that the correct features are in force. This is accomplised
with an option in |\babelprovide|, as illustrated:
  \begingroup
% If you are looking at the code to see how it has been written, you
% will be disappointed :-). The following example is built ad hoc to
% emulate the final result to avoid dependencies, and therefore it's
% not "real" code.
\setmonofont[Scale=.87,Script=Arabic]{DejaVu Sans Mono} \catcode`@=13
\def@#1{\ifcase#1\relax \egroup \or \bgroup\textdir TRT \else
\bgroup\textdir TLT \pardir TLT \fi}
\begin{verbatim}
\documentclass{book}

\usepackage[english, _bidi=basic_]{babel}

\babelprovide[_mapfont=direction_]{arabic}

\babelfont{rm}{Crimson}
\babelfont[*arabic]{rm}{FreeSerif}

\begin{document}

Most Arabic speakers consider the two varieties to be two registers
of one language, although the two registers can be referred to in
Arabic as @1فصحى العصر@0 \textit{fuṣḥā l-ʻaṣr} (MSA) and
@1فصحى التراث@0 \textit{fuṣḥā t-turāth} (CA).

\end{document}
\end{verbatim}
\endgroup
What |mapfont=direction| means is, ‘when a character has the same
direction as the script for the “provided” language (|arabic| in
this case), then change its font to that set for this language’ (here
defined via |*arabic|, because Crimson does not provide Arabic
letters).

Boxes are “black boxes”. Numbers inside an |\hbox| (as for example
in a |\ref|) do not know anything about the surrounding chars. So,
|\ref{A}-\ref{B}| are not rendered in the visual order A-B, but in the
wrong one B-A (because the hyphen does not “see” the digits inside the
|\hbox|’es). If you need |\ref| ranges, the best option is to define
a dedicated macro like this (to avoid explicit direction changes in the
body; here |\texthe| must be defined to select the main language):
\begin{verbatim}
\newcommand\refrange[2]{\babelsublr{\texthe{\ref{#1}}-\texthe{\ref{#2}}}}
\end{verbatim}

In a future a more complete method, reading recursively boxed text, may
be added.

There are samples on GitHub, under \texttt{/required/babel/samples}:
|lua-bidibasic.tex| and |lua-secenum.tex|.

\medskip
\textbf{Old stuff}

A couple of tentative macros were provided by \babel{} ($\ge$3.9g) with
a partial solution for ``Unicode'' fonts. These macros are now
deprecated --- use |\babelfont|. A short description follows, for
reference:
\begin{itemize}
\item |\babelFSstore|\marg{babel-language} sets the current three
  basic families (rm, sf, tt) as the default for the language
  given.
\item |\babelFSdefault|\marg{babel-language}\marg{fontspec-features}
  patches |\fontspec| so that the given features are always passed as
  the optional argument or added to it (not an ideal solution).
\end{itemize}
So, for example:
\begin{verbatim}
\setmainfont[Language=Turkish]{Minion Pro}
\babelFSstore{turkish}
\setmainfont{Minion Pro}
\babelFSfeatures{turkish}{Language=Turkish}
\end{verbatim}

\medskip
\textbf{Bidi writing} in \luatex{} is under development, but a basic
implementation is almost finished. On the other hand, in \xetex{} it is
taking its first steps. The latter engine poses quite different
challenges. An option to manage document layout in \luatex{} (lists,
footnotes, etc.) is almost finished, but \xetex{} required more work.

See the code section for |\foreignlanguage*| (a new starred version of
|\foreignlanguage|).

\xetex{} relies on the font to properly handle these unmarked changes,
so it is not under the control of \TeX.

\section{Loading languages with \file{language.dat}}

\TeX{} and most engines based on it (pdf\TeX, \xetex, $\epsilon$-\TeX,
the main exception being \luatex) require hyphenation patterns to be
preloaded when a format is created (eg, \LaTeX, Xe\LaTeX,
pdf\LaTeX). \babel{} provides a tool which has become standand in many
distributions and based on a ``configuration file'' named
\file{language.dat}. The exact way this file is used depends on the
distribution, so please, read the documentation for the latter (note
also some distributions generate the file with some tool).

\New{3.9q} With \luatex, however, patterns are loaded on the fly when
requested by the language (except the ``0th'' language, typically
\textsf{english}, which is preloaded always).\footnote{This feature
was added to 3.9o, but it was buggy. Both 3.9o and 3.9p are
deprecated.} Until 3.9n, this task was delegated to the package
\textsf{luatex-hyphen}, by Khaled Hosny, \'Elie Roux, and Manuel
P\'egouri\'e-Gonnard, and required an extra file named
|language.dat.lua|, but now a new mechanism has been devised based
solely on |language.dat|. \textbf{You must rebuild the formats} if
upgrading from a previous version.  You may want to have a local
|language.dat| for a particular project (for example, a book on
Chemistry).\footnote{The loader for lua(e)tex is slightly different as
it's not based on \babel{} but on \texttt{etex.src}. Until 3.9p it
just didn't work, but thanks to the new code it works by reloading the
data in the \babel{} way, i.e., with \texttt{language.dat}.}

\subsection{Format}

In that file the person who maintains a \TeX\ environment has to record
for which languages he has hyphenation patterns \emph{and} in which
files these are stored\footnote{This is because different operating
systems sometimes use \emph{very} different file-naming
conventions.}. When hyphenation exceptions are stored in a separate
file this can be indicated by naming that file \emph{after} the file
with the hyphenation patterns.

The file can contain empty lines and comments, as well as lines which
start with an equals (\texttt{=}) sign. Such a line will instruct
\LaTeX\ that the hyphenation patterns just processed have to be known
under an alternative name. Here is an example:
\begin{verbatim}
% File    : language.dat
% Purpose : tell iniTeX what files with patterns to load.
english    english.hyphenations
=british

dutch      hyphen.dutch exceptions.dutch % Nederlands
german hyphen.ger
\end{verbatim}

You may also set the font encoding the patterns are intended for by
following the language name by a colon and the encoding
code.\footnote{This in not a new feature, but in former versions it
didn't work correctly.} For example:
\begin{verbatim}
german:T1 hyphenT1.ger
german hyphen.ger
\end{verbatim}
With the previous settings, if the enconding when the language is
selected is |T1| then the patterns in \file{hyphenT1.ger} are
used, but otherwise use those in \file{hyphen.ger} (note the encoding
could be set in |\extras|\m{lang}).

A typical error when using \babel{} is the following:
\begin{verbatim}
No hyphenation patterns were preloaded for
the language `<lang>' into the format.
Please, configure your TeX system to add them and
rebuild the format. Now I will use the patterns
preloaded for english instead}}
\end{verbatim}
It simply means you must reconfigure \file{language.dat}, either by
hand or with the tools provided by your distribution.

\section{The interface between the core of \babel{} and the language
definition files}

The \textit{language definition files} (ldf) must conform to a
number of conventions, because these files have to fill in the gaps
left by the common code in \file{babel.def}, i.\,e., the
definitions of the macros that produce texts.  Also the
language-switching possibility which has been built into the
\babel{} system has its implications.

The following assumptions are made:
\begin{itemize}
\item Some of the language-specific definitions might be used by plain
  \TeX\ users, so the files have to be coded so that they can be read
  by both \LaTeX\ and plain \TeX. The current format can be checked by
  looking at the value of the macro |\fmtname|.
\item The common part of the \babel{} system redefines a number of
  macros and environments (defined previously in the document style)
  to put in the names of macros that replace the previously hard-wired
  texts.  These macros have to be defined in the language definition
  files.
\item The language definition files must define five macros, used to
  activate and deactivate the language-specific definitions.  These
  macros are |\|\langvar|hyphenmins|, |\captions|\langvar,
  |\date|\langvar, |\extras|\langvar\ and |\noextras|\langvar (the
  last two may be left empty); where \langvar\ is either the name of
  the language definition file or the name of the \LaTeX\ option that
  is to be used. These macros and their functions are discussed
  below. You must define all or none for a language (or a dialect);
  defining, say, |\date|\langvar\ but not |\captions|\langvar\ does
  not raise an error but can lead to unexpected results.
\item When a language definition file is loaded, it can define
  |\l@|\langvar\ to be a dialect of |\language0| when |\l@|\langvar\
  is undefined.
\item Language names must be all lowercase. If an unknow language is
  selected, \babel{} will attempt setting it after lowercasing its
  name.
\item The semantics of modifiers is not defined (on purpose). In
  most cases, they will just be simple separated options (eg,
  \texttt{spanish}), but a language might require, say, a set of
  options organized as a tree with suboptions (in such a case, the
  recommended separator is \verb|/|).
\end{itemize}

Some recommendations:
\begin{itemize}
\item The preferred shorthand is |"|, which is not used in \LaTeX{}
  (quotes are entered as |``| and |''|). Other good choices are
  characters which are not used in a certain context (eg, |=| in an
  ancient language). Note however |=|, |<|, |>|, |:| and the like
  can be dangerous, because they may be used as part of the syntax
  of some elements (numeric expressions, key/value pairs, etc.).
\item Captions should not contain shorthands or encoding dependent
  commands (the latter is not always possible, but should be clearly
  documented). They should be defined using the LICR. You may
  also use the new tools for encoded strings, described below.
\item Avoid adding things to |\noextras|\m{lang} except for umlauthigh
  and friends, |\bbl@deactivate|, |\bbl@(non)frenchspacing|, and
  language specific macros. Use always, if possible, |\bbl@save| and
  |\bbl@savevariable| (except if you still want to have access to the
  previous value). Do not reset a macro or a setting to a hardcoded
  value. Never. Instead save its value in |\extras|\m{lang}.
\item Do not switch scripts. If you want to make sure a set of glyphs
  is used, switch either the font encoding (low level) or the language
  (high level, which in turn may switch the font encoding). Usage of things
  like |\latintext| is deprecated.\footnote{But not removed, for backward
  compatibility.}
\item Please, for ``private'' internal macros do not use the |\bbl@|
  prefix. It is used by \babel{} and it can lead to incompatibilities.
\end{itemize}

There are no special requirements for documenting your language
files. Now they are not included in the base \babel{} manual, so
provide a standalone document suited for your needs, as well as other
files you think can be useful. A PDF and a ``readme'' are strongly
recommended.

\subsection{Guidelines for contributed languages}
\label{contribute}

Now language files are “outsourced” and are located in a separate
directory (\texttt{/macros/latex/contrib/babel-contrib}), so that they
are contributed directly to CTAN (please, do not send to me language
styles just to upload them to CTAN).

Of course, placing your style files in this directory is not mandatory,
but if you want to do it, here are a few guidelines.

\begin{itemize}
\item Do not hesitate stating on the file heads you are the author and the
  maintainer, if you actually are. There is no need to state the babel
  maintainer(s) as authors if they have not contributed significantly
  to your language files.
\item Fonts are not strictly part of a language, so they are best placed
  in the corresponding TeX tree. This includes not only \texttt{tfm},
  \texttt{vf}, \texttt{ps1}, \texttt{otf}, \texttt{mf} files and the
  like, but also \texttt{fd} ones.
\item Font and input encodings are usually best placed in the
  corresponding tree, too, but sometimes they belong more naturally to
  the babel style.  Note you may also need to define a LICR.
\item \Babel{} ldf files may just interface a framework, as it happens often
  with Oriental languages/scripts. This framework is best placed in its
  own directory.
\end{itemize}

The following page provides a starting point:
\texttt{http://www.texnia.com/incubator.html}.

If your need further assistance and technical advice in the
development of language styles, I am willing to help you.  And of
course, you can make any suggestion you like.

\subsection{Basic macros}

In the core of the \babel{} system, several macros are defined for use
in language definition files. Their purpose is to make a new language
known. The first two are related to hyphenation patterns.

\DescribeMacro{\addlanguage}
The macro |\addlanguage| is a non-outer version of the macro
|\newlanguage|, defined in \file{plain.tex} version~3.x. For older
versions of \file{plain.tex} and \file{lplain.tex} a substitute
definition is used. Here ``language'' is used in the \TeX{} sense of
set of hyphenation patterns.

\DescribeMacro{\adddialect}
The macro |\adddialect| can be used when two languages can (or
must) use the same hyphenation patterns. This can also be useful
for languages for which no patterns are preloaded in the
format. In such cases the default behavior of the \babel{}
system is to define this language as a `dialect' of the language
for which the patterns were loaded as |\language0|.  Here
``language'' is used in the \TeX{} sense of set of hyphenation
patterns.

\DescribeMacro{\<lang>hyphenmins}
The macro |\|\langvar|hyphenmins| is used to store the values of
the |\lefthyphenmin| and |\righthyphenmin|. Redefine this macro
to set your own values, with two numbers corresponding to these
two parameters. For example:
\begin{verbatim}
\renewcommand\spanishhyphenmins{34}
\end{verbatim}
(Assigning |\lefthyphenmin| and |\righthyphenmin| directly in
|\extras<lang>| has no effect.)

\DescribeMacro{\providehyphenmins}
The macro |\providehyphenmins| should be used in the language
definition files to set |\lefthyphenmin| and
|\righthyphenmin|. This macro will check whether these parameters
were provided by the hyphenation file before it takes any action.
If these values have been already set, this command is ignored
(currenty, default pattern files do \textit{not} set them).

\DescribeMacro{\captions\langvar}
The macro |\captions|\langvar\ defines the macros that
hold the texts to replace the original hard-wired texts.

\DescribeMacro{\date\langvar}
The macro |\date|\langvar\ defines |\today|.

\DescribeMacro{\extras\langvar}
The macro |\extras|\langvar\ contains all the extra definitions needed
for a specific language. This macro, like the following, is a hook --
you can add things to it, but it must not be used directly.

\DescribeMacro{\noextras\langvar}
Because we want to let the user switch
between languages, but we do not know what state \TeX\ might be in
after the execution of |\extras|\langvar, a macro that brings
\TeX\ into a predefined state is needed. It will be no surprise
that the name of this macro is |\noextras|\langvar.

\DescribeMacro{\bbl@declare@ttribute}
This is a command to be used in the language definition files for
declaring a language attribute. It takes three arguments: the
name of the language, the attribute to be defined, and the code
to be executed when the attribute is to be used.

\DescribeMacro{\main@language}
To postpone the activation of the definitions needed for a
language until the beginning of a document, all language
definition files should use |\main@language| instead of
|\selectlanguage|. This will just store the name of the language,
and the proper language will be activated at the start of the
document.

\DescribeMacro{\ProvidesLanguage}
The macro |\ProvidesLanguage| should be used to identify the
language definition files. Its syntax is similar to the syntax
of the \LaTeX\ command |\ProvidesPackage|.

\DescribeMacro{\LdfInit}
The macro |\LdfInit| performs a couple of standard checks that
must be made at the beginning of a language definition file,
such as checking the category code of the @-sign, preventing
the \file{.ldf} file from being processed twice, etc.

\DescribeMacro{\ldf@quit}
The macro |\ldf@quit| does work needed
if a \file{.ldf} file was processed
earlier. This includes resetting the category code
of the @-sign, preparing the language to be activated at
|\begin{document}| time, and ending the input stream.

\DescribeMacro{\ldf@finish}
The macro |\ldf@finish| does work needed
at the end of each \file{.ldf} file. This
includes resetting the category code of the @-sign,
loading a local configuration file, and preparing the language
to be activated at |\begin{document}| time.

\DescribeMacro{\loadlocalcfg}
After processing a language definition file,
\LaTeX\ can be instructed to load a local configuration
file. This file can, for instance, be used to add strings to
|\captions|\langvar\ to support local document
classes. The user will be informed that this
configuration file has been loaded. This macro is called by
|\ldf@finish|.

\DescribeMacro{\substitutefontfamily}
(Deprecated.) This command takes three arguments, a font encoding and
two font family names. It creates a font description file for the
first font in the given encoding. This \file{.fd} file will instruct
\LaTeX\ to use a font from the second family when a font from the
first family in the given encoding seems to be needed.

\subsection{Skeleton}

Here is the basic structure of an |ldf| file, with a language, a
dialect and an attribute. Strings are best defined using the method
explained in in sec. \ref{s:strings} (\babel{} 3.9 and later).

\begin{verbatim}
\ProvidesLanguage{<language>}
     [2016/04/23 v0.0 <Language> support from the babel system]
\LdfInit{<language>}{captions<language>}

\ifx\undefined\l@<language>
  \@nopatterns{<Language>}
  \adddialect\l@<language>0
\fi

\adddialect\l@<dialect>\l@<language>

\bbl@declare@ttribute{<language>}{<attrib>}{%
  \expandafter\addto\expandafter\extras<language>
  \expandafter{\extras<attrib><language>}%
  \let\captions<language>\captions<attrib><language>}

\providehyphenmins{<language>}{\tw@\thr@@}

\StartBabelCommands*{<language>}{captions}
\SetString\chaptername{<chapter name>}
% More strings

\StartBabelCommands*{<language>}{date}
\SetString\monthiname{<name of first month>}
% More strings

\StartBabelCommands*{<dialect>}{captions}
\SetString\chaptername{<chapter name>}
% More strings

\StartBabelCommands*{<dialect>}{date}
\SetString\monthiname{<name of first month>}
% More strings

\EndBabelCommands

\addto\extras<language>{}
\addto\noextras<language>{}
\let\extras<dialect>\extras<language>
\let\noextras<dialect>\noextras<language>

\ldf@finish{<language>}
\end{verbatim}

\subsection{Support for active characters}

In quite a number of language definition files, active characters are
introduced. To facilitate this, some support macros are provided.

\DescribeMacro{\initiate@active@char}
The internal macro |\initiate@active@char| is used in language
definition files to instruct \LaTeX\ to give a character the category
code `active'. When a character has been made active it will remain
that way until the end of the document. Its definition may vary.

\DescribeMacro{\bbl@activate}
\DescribeMacro{\bbl@deactivate}
The command |\bbl@activate| is used to change the way an active
character expands. |\bbl@activate| `switches on' the active behavior
of the character. |\bbl@deactivate| lets the active character expand
to its former (mostly) non-active self.

\DescribeMacro{\declare@shorthand}
The macro |\declare@shorthand| is used to define the various
shorthands. It takes three arguments: the name for the collection of
shorthands this definition belongs to; the character (sequence) that
makes up the shorthand, i.e.\ |~| or |"a|; and the code to be executed
when the shorthand is encountered. (It does \textit{not} raise an
error if the shorthand character has not been ``initiated''.)

\DescribeMacro{\bbl@add@special}
\DescribeMacro{\bbl@remove@special}
The \TeX book states: ``Plain \TeX\ includes a macro called
|\dospecials| that is essentially a set macro, representing the set of
all characters that have a special category code.'' \cite[p.~380]{DEK}
It is used to set text `verbatim'.  To make this work if more
characters get a special category code, you have to add this character
to the macro |\dospecial|.  \LaTeX\ adds another macro called
|\@sanitize| representing the same character set, but without the
curly braces.  The macros |\bbl@add@special|\meta{char} and
|\bbl@remove@special|\meta{char} add and remove the character
\meta{char} to these two sets.

\subsection{Support for saving macro definitions}

Language definition files may want to \emph{re}define macros that
already exist. Therefore a mechanism for saving (and restoring) the
original definition of those macros is provided. We provide two macros
for this\footnote{This mechanism was introduced by Bernd Raichle.}.

\DescribeMacro{\babel@save}
To save the current meaning of any control sequence, the macro
|\babel@save| is provided. It takes one argument, \meta{csname}, the
control sequence for which the meaning has to be saved.

\DescribeMacro{\babel@savevariable}
A second macro is provided to save the current value of a variable.
In this context, anything that is allowed after the |\the| primitive
is considered to be a variable. The macro takes one argument, the
\meta{variable}.

The effect of the preceding macros is to append a piece of code to
the current definition of |\originalTeX|. When |\originalTeX| is
expanded, this code restores the previous definition of the control
sequence or the previous value of the variable.

\subsection{Support for extending macros}

\DescribeMacro{\addto}
The macro |\addto{|\meta{control sequence}|}{|\meta{\TeX\ code}|}| can
be used to extend the definition of a macro. The macro need not be
defined (ie, it can be undefined or |\relax|). This macro can, for
instance, be used in adding instructions to a macro like
|\extrasenglish|.

Be careful when using this macro, because depending on the case the
assignment could be either global (usually) or local (sometimes). That
does not seem very consistent, but this behavior is preserved for
backward compatibility. If you are using \pkg{etoolbox}, by Philipp
Lehman, consider using the tools provided by this package instead of
|\addto|.

\subsection{Macros common to a number of languages}

\DescribeMacro{\bbl@allowhyphens}
In several languages compound words are used. This means that when
\TeX\ has to hyphenate such a compound word, it only does so at the
`\texttt{-}' that is used in such words. To allow hyphenation in the
rest of such a compound word, the macro |\bbl@allowhyphens| can be
used.

\DescribeMacro{\allowhyphens}
Same as |\bbl@allowhyphens|, but does nothing if the encoding is
|T1|. It is intended mainly for characters provided as real glyphs by
this encoding but constructed with |\accent| in |OT1|.

Note the previous command (|\bbl@allowhyphens|) has different
applications (hyphens and discretionaries) than this one (composite
chars). Note also prior to version 3.7, |\allowhyphens| had the
behavior of |\bbl@allowhyphens|.

\DescribeMacro{\set@low@box}
For some languages, quotes need to be lowered to the baseline. For
this purpose the macro |\set@low@box| is available. It takes one
argument and puts that argument in an |\hbox|, at the baseline. The
result is available in |\box0| for further processing.

\DescribeMacro{\save@sf@q}
Sometimes it is necessary to preserve the |\spacefactor|.  For this
purpose the macro |\save@sf@q| is available. It takes one argument,
saves the current spacefactor, executes the argument, and restores the
spacefactor.

\DescribeMacro{\bbl@frenchspacing}
\DescribeMacro{\bbl@nonfrenchspacing}
The commands |\bbl@frenchspacing| and |\bbl@nonfrenchspacing| can be
used to properly switch French spacing on and off.

\subsection{Encoding-dependent strings}
\label{s:strings}

\New{3.9a} Babel 3.9 provides a way of defining strings in several
encodings, intended mainly for \luatex{} and \xetex. This is the only new
feature requiring changes in language files if you want to make use of
it.

Furthermore, it must be activated explicitly, with the package option
|strings|. If there is no |strings|, these blocks are ignored, except
|\SetCase|s (and except if forced as described below). In other words,
the old way of defining/switching strings still works and it's used by
default.

It consist is a series of blocks started with
|\StartBabelCommands|. The last block is closed with
|\EndBabelCommands|. Each block is a single group (ie, local
declarations apply until the next |\StartBabelCommands| or
|\EndBabelCommands|). An |ldf| may contain several series of this
kind.

Thanks to this new feature, string values and string language
switching are not mixed any more. No need of |\addto|. If the language
is |french|, just redefine |\frenchchaptername|.

\Describe\StartBabelCommands
  {\marg{language-list}\marg{category}\oarg{selector}}

The \m{language-list} specifies which languages the block is
intended for. A block is taken into account only if the
|\CurrentOption| is listed here. Alternatively, you can define
|\BabelLanguages| to a comma-separated list of languages to be
defined (if undefined, |\StartBabelCommands| sets it to
|\CurrentOption|). You may write |\CurrentOption| as the language,
but this is discouraged -- a explicit name (or names) is much better
and clearer.

A ``selector'' is a name to be used as value in package option
|strings|, optionally followed by extra info about the encodings to be
used. The name |unicode| must be used for \xetex{} and \luatex{} (the
key |strings| has also other two special values: |generic| and
|encoded|).

If a string is set several times (because several blocks are read),
the first one take precedence (ie, it works much like
|\providecommand|).

Encoding info is |charset=| followed by a charset, which if given sets
how the strings should be traslated to the internal representation
used by the engine, typically |utf8|, which is the only value
supported currently (default is no traslations). Note |charset| is
applied by \luatex{} and \xetex{} when reading the file, not when the
macro or string is used in the document.

A list of font encodings which the strings are expected to work with
can be given after |fontenc=| (separated with spaces, if two or more) --
recommended, but not mandatory, although blocks without this key are
not taken into account if you have requested |strings=encoded|.

Blocks without a selector are read always if the key |strings| has
been used.  They provide fallback values, and therefore must be the
last blocks; they should be provided always if possible and all
strings should be defined somehow inside it; they can be the only
blocks (mainly LGC scripts using the LICR). Blocks without a selector
can be activated explicitly with |strings=generic| (no block is taken
into account except those). With |strings=encoded|, strings in those
blocks are set as default (internally, |?|). With |strings=encoded|
strings are protected, but they are correctly expanded in
|\MakeUppercase| and the like. If there is no key |strings|, string
definitions are ignored, but |\SetCase|s are still honoured (in a
|encoded| way).

The \m{category} is either |captions|, |date| or |extras|. You must
stick to these three categories, even if no error is raised when using
other name.\footnote{In future releases further categories may be
added.\nb{like `monetary', `time', `address', `name', `case' or
`numeric'}} It may be empty, too, but in such a case using
|\SetString| is an error (but not |\SetCase|).

\begin{verbatim}
\StartBabelCommands{language}{captions}
  [unicode, fontenc=TU EU1 EU2, charset=utf8]
\SetString{\chaptername}{utf8-string}

\StartBabelCommands{language}{captions}
\SetString{\chaptername}{ascii-maybe-LICR-string}

\EndBabelCommands
\end{verbatim}

A real example is:
\begin{verbatim}
\StartBabelCommands{austrian}{date}
  [unicode, fontenc=TU EU1 EU2, charset=utf8]
  \SetString\monthiname{Jänner}

\StartBabelCommands{german,austrian}{date}
  [unicode, fontenc=TU EU1 EU2, charset=utf8]
  \SetString\monthiiiname{März}

\StartBabelCommands{austrian}{date}
  \SetString\monthiname{J\"{a}nner}

\StartBabelCommands{german}{date}
  \SetString\monthiname{Januar}

\StartBabelCommands{german,austrian}{date}
  \SetString\monthiiname{Februar}
  \SetString\monthiiiname{M\"{a}rz}
  \SetString\monthivname{April}
  \SetString\monthvname{Mai}
  \SetString\monthviname{Juni}
  \SetString\monthviiname{Juli}
  \SetString\monthviiiname{August}
  \SetString\monthixname{September}
  \SetString\monthxname{Oktober}
  \SetString\monthxiname{November}
  \SetString\monthxiiname{Dezenber}
  \SetString\today{\number\day.~%
    \csname month\romannumeral\month name\endcsname\space
    \number\year}

\StartBabelCommands{german,austrian}{captions}
  \SetString\prefacename{Vorwort}
  [etc.]

\EndBabelCommands
\end{verbatim}

When used in |ldf| files, previous values of |\|\m{category}\m{language}
are overriden, which means the old way to define strings still works
and used by default (to be precise, is first set to undefined and then
strings are added). However, when used in the preamble or in a
package, new settings are added to the previous ones, if the language
exists (in the \babel{} sense, ie, if |\date|\m{language} exists).

\Describe\StartBabelCommands{%
  \colorbox{thegrey}{\ttfamily\hskip-.2em*\hskip-.2em}%
  \marg{language-list}\marg{category}\oarg{selector}}
The starred version just forces |strings| to take a value -- if not set
as package option, then the default for the engine is used. This is
not done by default to prevent backward incompatibilities, but if you
are creating a new language this version is better. It's up to
the maintainers of the current languages to decide if using it is
appropiate.\footnote{This replaces in 3.9g a short-lived
\texttt{\string\UseStrings} which has been removed because it did
not work.}

\Describe{\EndBabelCommands}{}
Marks the end of the series of blocks.

\Describe{\AfterBabelCommands}{\marg{code}}
The code is delayed and executed at the global scope just after
|\EndBabelCommands|.

\Describe{\SetString}{\marg{macro-name}\marg{string}}
Adds \meta{macro-name} to the current category, and defines globally
\meta{lang-macro-name} to \meta{code} (after applying the
transformation corresponding to the current charset or defined with
the hook |stringprocess|).

Use this command to define strings, without including any ``logic'' if
possible, which should be a separated macro. See the example above for
the date.

\Describe{\SetStringLoop}{\marg{macro-name}\marg{string-list}}
A convenient way to define several ordered names at once. For example,
to define |\abmoniname|, |\abmoniiname|, etc. (and similarly with
|abday|):
\begin{verbatim}
\SetStringLoop{abmon#1name}{en,fb,mr,ab,my,jn,jl,ag,sp,oc,nv,dc}
\SetStringLoop{abday#1name}{lu,ma,mi,ju,vi,sa,do}
\end{verbatim}
|#1| is replaced by the roman numeral.

\Describe\SetCase{\oarg{map-list}\marg{toupper-code}\marg{tolower-code}}
Sets globally code to be executed at |\MakeUppercase| and
|\MakeLowercase|. The code would be typically things like |\let\BB\bb|
and |\uccode| or |\lccode| (although for the reasons explained above,
changes in lc/uc codes may not work). A \meta{map-list} is a series of
macros using the internal format of |\@uclclist| (eg,
|\bb\BB\cc\CC|). The mandatory arguments take precedence over the
optional one. This command, unlike |\SetString|, is executed always
(even without |strings|), and it is intented for minor readjustments
only.

For example, as |T1| is the default case mapping in \LaTeX, we could
set for Turkish:
\begin{verbatim}
\StartBabelCommands{turkish}{}[ot1enc, fontenc=OT1]
\SetCase
  {\uccode"10=`I\relax}
  {\lccode`I="10\relax}

\StartBabelCommands{turkish}{}[unicode, fontenc=TU EU1 EU2, charset=utf8]
\SetCase
  {\uccode`i=`İ\relax
   \uccode`ı=`I\relax}
  {\lccode`İ=`i\relax
   \lccode`I=`ı\relax}

\StartBabelCommands{turkish}{}
\SetCase
  {\uccode`i="9D\relax
   \uccode"19=`I\relax}
  {\lccode"9D=`i\relax
   \lccode`I="19\relax}

\EndBabelCommands
\end{verbatim}
(Note the mapping for |OT1| is not complete.)

\Describe\SetHyphenMap{\marg{to-lower-macros}}
\New{3.9g} Case mapping serves in \TeX{} for two unrelated purposes: case
transforms (upper/lower) and hyphenation. |\SetCase| handles the
former, while hyphenation is handled by |\SetHyphenMap| and controlled
with the package option |hyphenmap|. So, even if internally they are based
on the same \TeX{} primitive (|\lccode|), \babel{} sets them separately.

There are three helper macros to
be used inside |\SetHyphenMap|:
\begin{itemize}
\item |\BabelLower|\marg{uccode}\marg{lccode} is
  similar to |\lccode| but it's ignored if the char has been set and
  saves the original lccode to restore it when switching the language
  (except with |hyphenmap=first|).
\item |\BabelLowerMM|\marg{uccode-from}\marg{uccode-to}%
  \marg{step}\marg{lccode-from} loops though the given uppercase
  codes, using the step, and assigns them the lccode, which is also
  increased (|MM| stands for \textit{many-to-many}).
\item |\BabelLowerMO|\marg{uccode-from}\marg{uccode-to}%
  \marg{step}\marg{lccode} loops though the given uppercase
  codes, using the step, and assigns them the lccode, which is fixed
  (|MO| stands for \textit{many-to-one}).
\end{itemize}
An example is (which is redundant, because these assignments are done
by both \luatex{} and \xetex{}):
\begin{verbatim}
\SetHyphenMap{\BabelLowerMM{"100}{"11F}{2}{"101}}
\end{verbatim}

This macro is not intended to fix wrong mappings done by Unicode
(which are the default in both \xetex{} and \luatex{}) -- if an
assignment is wrong, fix it directly.

\section{Changes}

\subsection{Changes in \babel\ version 3.9}

Most of changes in version 3.9 are related to bugs, either to fix them
(there were lots), or to provide some alternatives. Even new features
like |\babelhyphen| are intended to solve a certain problem (in this
case, the lacking of a uniform syntax and behavior for shorthands
across languages). These changes are described in this manual in the
corresponding place. A selective list follows:
\begin{itemize}
\item |\select@language| did not set |\languagename|. This meant the
  language in force when auxiliary files were loaded was the one used
  in, for example, shorthands -- if the language was |german|, a
  |\select@language{spanish}| had no effect.

\item |\foreignlanguage| and |otherlanguage*| messed up
  |\extras<language>|. Scripts, encodings and many other things were
  not switched correctly.

\item The |:ENC| mechanism for hyphenation patterns used the encoding
  of the \textit{previous} language, not that of the language being
  selected.

\item |'| (with |activeacute|) had the original value when writing to an
  auxiliary file, and things like an infinite loop could happen. It
  worked incorrectly with |^| (if activated) and also if deactivated.

\item Active chars where not reset at the end of language options, and
  that lead to incompatibilities between languages.

\item |\textormath| raised and error with a conditional.

\item |\aliasshorthand| didn't work (or only in a few and very specific
  cases).

\item |\l@english| was defined incorrectly (using |\let| instead of
  |\chardef|).

\item |ldf| files not bundled with babel were not recognized when
  called as global options.
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Changes in \babel\ version 3.7}

In \babel\ version 3.7 a number of bugs that were found in
version~3.6 are fixed. Also a number of changes and additions
have occurred:
\begin{itemize}
\item Shorthands are expandable again. The disadvantage is that
  one has to type |'{}a| when the acute accent is used as a
  shorthand character. The advantage is that a number of other
  problems (such as the breaking of ligatures, etc.) have
  vanished.
\item Two new commands, |\shorthandon| and |\shorthandoff| have
  been introduced to enable to temporarily switch off one or more
  shorthands.
\item Support for typesetting Hebrew (and potential support for
  typesetting other right-to-left written languages) is now
  available thanks to Rama Porrat and Boris Lavva.
\item A language attribute has been added to the |\mark...|
  commands in order to make sure that a Greek header line comes
  out right on the last page before a language switch.
\item Hyphenation pattern files are now read \emph{inside a
  group}; therefore any changes a pattern file needs to make to
  lowercase codes, uppercase codes, and category codes are kept
  local to that group. If they are needed for the language, these
  changes will need to be repeated and stored in |\extras...|
\item The concept of language attributes is introduced. It is intended
  to give the user some control over the features a
  language-definition file provides. Its first use is for the Greek
  language, where the user can choose the πολυτονικό (``polytonikó'' or
  multi-accented) Greek way of typesetting texts.
\item The environment \Lenv{hyphenrules} is introduced.
\item The syntax of the file \file{language.dat} has been
  extended to allow (optionally) specifying the font
  encoding to be used while processing the patterns file.
\item The command |\providehyphenmins| should now be used in
  language definition files in order to be able to keep any
  settings provided by the pattern file.
\end{itemize}

\DocInput{babel.dtx}

\section{Acknowledgements}

I would like to thank all who volunteered as $\beta$-testers for their
time. Michel Goossens supplied contributions for most of the other
languages.  Nico Poppelier helped polish the text of the documentation
and supplied parts of the macros for the Dutch language.  Paul Wackers
and Werenfried Spit helped find and repair bugs.

During the further development of the babel system I received much
help from Bernd Raichle, for which I am grateful.

\begin{thebibliography}{9}
 \bibitem{AT} Huda Smitshuijzen Abifares, \textit{Arabic Typography},
   Saqi, 2001.
 \bibitem{DEK} Donald E. Knuth,
   \emph{The \TeX book}, Addison-Wesley, 1986.
 \bibitem{LLbook} Leslie Lamport,
    \emph{\LaTeX, A document preparation System}, Addison-Wesley,
    1986.
 \bibitem{treebus} K.F. Treebus.
    \emph{Tekstwijzer, een gids voor het grafisch verwerken van
    tekst.}
    SDU Uitgeverij ('s-Gravenhage, 1988).
 \bibitem{HP} Hubert Partl,
   \emph{German \TeX}, \emph{TUGboat} 9 (1988) \#1, p.~70--72.
  \bibitem{LLth} Leslie Lamport,
    in: \TeX hax Digest, Volume 89, \#13, 17 February 1989.
 \bibitem{BEP} Johannes Braams, Victor Eijkhout and Nico Poppelier,
   \emph{The development of national \LaTeX\ styles},
   \emph{TUGboat} 10 (1989) \#3, p.~401--406.
 \bibitem{FE} Yannis Haralambous,
    \emph{Fonts \& Encodings}, O'Reilly, 2007.
 \bibitem{ilatex} Joachim Schrod,
   \emph{International \LaTeX\ is ready to use},
   \emph{TUGboat} 11 (1990) \#1, p.~87--90.
 \bibitem{STS} Apostolos Syropoulos, Antonis Tsolomitis and Nick
   Sofroniu,
   \emph{Digital typography using \LaTeX},
   Springer, 2002, p.~301--373.
\end{thebibliography}
\end{document}
%</filedriver>
%
% \fi
%
% \changes{babel~3.8e}{2005/03/24}{Many enhancements to the text by
%    Andrew Young}
% \changes{babel~3.9c}{2013/04/04}{Added the ``modifiers'' mechanism}
% \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/06/01}{bbplain merged}
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/03/23}{Code and doc reorganized, and some
%    minor enhancements}
%
%\begingroup
%  \catcode`<=\active%
%  \catcode`>=\active
%  \makeatletter
%  \gdef\MakePrivateLetters{%
%    \catcode`@=11\relax
%    \gdef<##1{\ifx##1@$\langle\langle$\bgroup\itshape\rmfamily
%      \expandafter\bblref
%      \else\string<##1\fi}%
%    \gdef\bblref##1@>{##1\/\egroup$\rangle\rangle$}}%
%  \global\let\check@percent\saved@check@percent
%\endgroup
%
% \part{The code}
%
% \babel{} is being developed incrementally, which means parts of the
% code are under development and therefore incomplete. Only documented
% features are considered complete. In other words, use \babel{} only
% as documented (except, of course, if you want to explore and test
% them -- you can post suggestions about multilingual issues to
% |kadingira@tug.org| on |http://tug.org/mailman/listinfo/kadingira|).
%
% \section{Identification and loading of required files}
%
%    \textit{Code documentation is still under revision.}
%
%    The \babel{} package after unpacking consists of the following files:
%    \begin{description}
%    \itemsep=-\parskip
%    \item[switch.def] defines macros to set and switch languages.
%    \item[babel.def] defines the rest of macros. It has tow parts: a
%    generic one and a second one only for LaTeX{}.
%    \item[babel.sty] is the \LaTeX{} package, which set options and
%    load language styles.
%  \item[plain.def] defines some \LaTeX{} macros required by
%    \file{babel.def} and provides a few tools for Plain.
%   \item[hyphen.cfg] is the file to be used when generating the
%    formats to load hyphenation patterns. By default it also loads
%    \file{switch.def}.
%    \end{description}
%
% The \babel{} installer extends \textsf{docstrip} with a few
% ``pseudo-guards'' to set ``variables'' used at installation time.
% They are used with |<||@name@>| at the appropiated places in the
% source code and shown below with
% $\langle\langle$\textit{name}$\rangle\rangle$. That brings a little
% bit of literate programming.
%
% \section{\texttt{locale} directory}
%
% A required component of \babel{} is a set of |ini| files
% with basic definitions for about 200 languages. They are distributed
% as a separate |zip| file, not packed as |dtx|. With them, babel
% will fully support Unicode engines.

% Most of them are essentially finished (except bugs and mistakes, of
% course). Some of them are still incomplete (but they will be usable),
% and there are some omissions (eg, Latin and polytonic Greek, and
% there are no geographic areas in Spanish). Hindi, French, Occitan and
% Breton will show a warning related to dates. Not all include LICR
% variants.
%
% This is a preliminary documentation.
%
% |ini| files contain the actual data; |tex| files are currently just
% proxies to the corresponding ini files.
%
% Most keys are self-explanatory.
% \begin{description}
% \item[charset] the encoding used in the ini file.
% \item[version] of the ini file
% \item[level] ``version'' of the ini specification . which keys are
%   available (they may grow in a compatible way) and how they should be
%   read.
% \item[encodings] a descriptive list of font encondings.
% \item[{[captions]}] section of captions in the file charset
% \item[{[captions.licr]}] same, but in pure ASCII using the LICR
% \item[date.long] fields are as in the CLDR, but the syntax is
%   different. Anything inside brackets is a date field (eg, |MMMM| for
%   the month name) and anything outside is text. In addition, |[ ]| is a
%   non breakable space and |[.]| is an abbreviation dot.
% \end{description}
%
% Keys may be further qualified in a particular language with a suffix
% starting with a uppercase letter. It can be just a letter (eg,
% babel.name.A, babel.name.B) or a name (eg, date.long.Nominative,
% date.long.Formal, but no language is currently using the latter).
% Multi-letter qualifiers are forward compatible in the sense they
% won’t conflict with new ``global'' keys (all lowercase).
%
% \section{Tools}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<version=3.22>>
%<<date=2018/06/05>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \textbf{Do not use the following macros in \texttt{ldf} files. They
% may change in the future}. This applies mainly to those recently
% added for replacing, trimming and looping. The older ones, like
% |\bbl@afterfi|, will not change.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9t}{2017/04/22}{Added new helper macros. Not all are
%   currently used, but will be in 3.10 -- \cs{bbl@trim},
%   \cs{bbl@ifunset}, \cs{bbl@exp}, \cs{bbl@stripslash}}
%
%    We define some basic macros which just make the code cleaner.
%    |\bbl@add| is now used internally instead of |\addto| because of
%    the unpredictable behavior of the latter. Used in
%    \file{babel.def} and in \file{babel.sty}, which means in \LaTeX{}
%    is executed twice, but we need them when defining options and
%    \file{babel.def} cannot be load until options have been defined.
%    This does not hurt, but should be fixed somehow.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/02/16}{\cs{@for} didn't work with
%    Plain. Added \cs{bbl@loop}}
% \changes{babel~3.15}{2017/10/30}{New convenience macros
%   \cs{bbl@xin@} and \cs{bbl@cs}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Basic macros>>
\bbl@trace{Basic macros}
\def\bbl@stripslash{\expandafter\@gobble\string}
\def\bbl@add#1#2{%
  \bbl@ifunset{\bbl@stripslash#1}%
    {\def#1{#2}}%
    {\expandafter\def\expandafter#1\expandafter{#1#2}}}
\def\bbl@xin@{\@expandtwoargs\in@}
\def\bbl@csarg#1#2{\expandafter#1\csname bbl@#2\endcsname}%
\def\bbl@cs#1{\csname bbl@#1\endcsname}
\def\bbl@loop#1#2#3{\bbl@@loop#1{#3}#2,\@nnil,}
\def\bbl@loopx#1#2{\expandafter\bbl@loop\expandafter#1\expandafter{#2}}
\def\bbl@@loop#1#2#3,{%
  \ifx\@nnil#3\relax\else
    \def#1{#3}#2\bbl@afterfi\bbl@@loop#1{#2}%
  \fi}
\def\bbl@for#1#2#3{\bbl@loopx#1{#2}{\ifx#1\@empty\else#3\fi}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9t}{2017/04/22}{Use \cs{bbl@ifunset} instead of
%    \cs{@ifundefined}.}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@add@list}
%    This internal macro adds its second argument to a comma
%    separated list in its first argument. When the list is not
%    defined yet (or empty), it will be initiated. It presumes
%    expandable character strings.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9t}{2017/04/22}{Redefined to avoid infinite loops
%    if the macro is \cs{relax}.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@add@list#1#2{%
  \edef#1{%
    \bbl@ifunset{\bbl@stripslash#1}%
      {}%
      {\ifx#1\@empty\else#1,\fi}%
    #2}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@afterelse}
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@afterfi}
%    Because the code that is used in the handling of active
%    characters may need to look ahead, we take extra care to `throw'
%    it over the |\else| and |\fi| parts of an
%    |\if|-statement\footnote{This code is based on code presented in
%    TUGboat vol. 12, no2, June 1991 in ``An expansion Power Lemma''
%    by Sonja Maus.}. These macros will break if another |\if...\fi|
%    statement appears in one of the arguments and it is not enclosed
%    in braces.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\long\def\bbl@afterelse#1\else#2\fi{\fi#1}
\long\def\bbl@afterfi#1\fi{\fi#1}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \begin{macro}{\bbl@trim}
%   The following piece of code is stolen (with some changes) from
%   \textsf{keyval}, by David Carlisle. It defines two macros:
%   |\bbl@trim| and |\bbl@trim@def|. The first one strips the leading
%   and trailing spaces from the second argument and then applies the
%   first argument (a macro, |\toks@| and the like). The second one,
%   as its name suggests, defines the first argument as the stripped
%   second argument.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@tempa#1{%
  \long\def\bbl@trim##1##2{%
    \futurelet\bbl@trim@a\bbl@trim@c##2\@nil\@nil#1\@nil\relax{##1}}%
  \def\bbl@trim@c{%
    \ifx\bbl@trim@a\@sptoken
      \expandafter\bbl@trim@b
    \else
      \expandafter\bbl@trim@b\expandafter#1%
    \fi}%
  \long\def\bbl@trim@b#1##1 \@nil{\bbl@trim@i##1}}
\bbl@tempa{ }
\long\def\bbl@trim@i#1\@nil#2\relax#3{#3{#1}}
\long\def\bbl@trim@def#1{\bbl@trim{\def#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
% \end{macro}
%
%
% \begin{macro}{\bbl@ifunset}
%   To check if a macro is defined, we create a new macro, which does
%   the same as |\@ifundefined|. However, in an $\epsilon$-tex engine,
%   it is based on |\ifcsname|, which is more efficient, and do not
%   waste memory.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@ifunset#1{%
  \expandafter\ifx\csname#1\endcsname\relax
    \expandafter\@firstoftwo
  \else
    \expandafter\@secondoftwo
  \fi}
\bbl@ifunset{ifcsname}%
  {}%
  {\def\bbl@ifunset#1{%
     \ifcsname#1\endcsname
       \expandafter\ifx\csname#1\endcsname\relax
         \bbl@afterelse\expandafter\@firstoftwo
       \else
         \bbl@afterfi\expandafter\@secondoftwo
       \fi
     \else
       \expandafter\@firstoftwo
     \fi}}
%    \end{macrocode}
% \end{macro}
%
% \begin{macro}{\bbl@ifblank}
%   A tool from \textsf{url}, by Donald Arseneau, which tests if a
%   string is empty or space.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@ifblank#1{%
  \bbl@ifblank@i#1\@nil\@nil\@secondoftwo\@firstoftwo\@nil}
\long\def\bbl@ifblank@i#1#2\@nil#3#4#5\@nil{#4}
%    \end{macrocode}
% \end{macro}
%
% For each element in the comma separated <key>|=|<value> list,
% execute <code> with |#1| and |#2| as the key and the value of
% current item (trimmed). In addition, the item is passed verbatim as
% |#3|. With the <key> alone, it passes |\@empty| (ie, the macro thus
% named, not an empty argument, which is what you get with <key>|=|
% and no value).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@forkv#1#2{%
  \def\bbl@kvcmd##1##2##3{#2}%
  \bbl@kvnext#1,\@nil,}
\def\bbl@kvnext#1,{%
  \ifx\@nil#1\relax\else
    \bbl@ifblank{#1}{}{\bbl@forkv@eq#1=\@empty=\@nil{#1}}%
    \expandafter\bbl@kvnext
  \fi}
\def\bbl@forkv@eq#1=#2=#3\@nil#4{%
  \bbl@trim@def\bbl@forkv@a{#1}%
  \bbl@trim{\expandafter\bbl@kvcmd\expandafter{\bbl@forkv@a}}{#2}{#4}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% A \textit{for} loop. Each item (trimmed), is |#1|.  It cannot be
% nested (it's doable, but we don't need it).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@vforeach#1#2{%
  \def\bbl@forcmd##1{#2}%
  \bbl@fornext#1,\@nil,}
\def\bbl@fornext#1,{%
  \ifx\@nil#1\relax\else
    \bbl@ifblank{#1}{}{\bbl@trim\bbl@forcmd{#1}}%
    \expandafter\bbl@fornext
  \fi}
\def\bbl@foreach#1{\expandafter\bbl@vforeach\expandafter{#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \begin{macro}{\bbl@replace}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@replace#1#2#3{% in #1 -> repl #2 by #3
  \toks@{}%
  \def\bbl@replace@aux##1#2##2#2{%
    \ifx\bbl@nil##2%
      \toks@\expandafter{\the\toks@##1}%
    \else
      \toks@\expandafter{\the\toks@##1#3}%
      \bbl@afterfi
      \bbl@replace@aux##2#2%
    \fi}%
  \expandafter\bbl@replace@aux#1#2\bbl@nil#2%
  \edef#1{\the\toks@}}
%    \end{macrocode}
% \end{macro}
%
% \begin{macro}{\bbl@exp}
%
%   Now, just syntactical sugar, but it makes partial expansion of
%   some code a lot more simple and readable. Here |\\| stands for
%   |\noexpand| and |\<..>| for |\noexpand| applied to a built macro
%   name (the latter does not define the macro if undefined to
%   |\relax|, because it is created locally). The result may be
%   followed by extra arguments, if necessary.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@exp#1{%
  \begingroup
    \let\\\noexpand
    \def\<##1>{\expandafter\noexpand\csname##1\endcsname}%
    \edef\bbl@exp@aux{\endgroup#1}%
  \bbl@exp@aux}
%    \end{macrocode}
% \end{macro}
%
% Two further tools.  |\bbl@samestring| first expand its arguments and
% then compare their expansion (sanitized, so that the catcodes do not
% matter). |\bbl@engine| takes the following values: 0 is pdf\TeX, 1
% is \luatex, and 2 is \xetex. You may use the latter it in your
% language style if you want.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@ifsamestring#1#2{%
  \begingroup
    \protected@edef\bbl@tempb{#1}%
    \edef\bbl@tempb{\expandafter\strip@prefix\meaning\bbl@tempb}%
    \protected@edef\bbl@tempc{#2}%
    \edef\bbl@tempc{\expandafter\strip@prefix\meaning\bbl@tempc}%
    \ifx\bbl@tempb\bbl@tempc
      \aftergroup\@firstoftwo
    \else
      \aftergroup\@secondoftwo
    \fi
  \endgroup}
\chardef\bbl@engine=%
  \ifx\directlua\@undefined
    \ifx\XeTeXinputencoding\@undefined
      \z@
    \else
      \tw@
    \fi
  \else
    \@ne
  \fi
%<</Basic macros>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Some files identify themselves with a \LaTeX{} macro. The following
% code is placed before them to define (and then undefine) if not in
% \LaTeX.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Make sure ProvidesFile is defined>>
\ifx\ProvidesFile\@undefined
  \def\ProvidesFile#1[#2 #3 #4]{%
    \wlog{File: #1 #4 #3 <#2>}%
    \let\ProvidesFile\@undefined}
\fi
%<</Make sure ProvidesFile is defined>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The following code is used in \file{babel.sty} and
% \file{babel.def}, and loads (only once) the data in |language.dat|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Load patterns in luatex>>
\ifx\directlua\@undefined\else
  \ifx\bbl@luapatterns\@undefined
    \input luababel.def
  \fi
\fi
%<</Load patterns in luatex>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following code is used in \file{babel.def} and
%    \file{switch.def}.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Load macros for plain if not LaTeX>>
\ifx\AtBeginDocument\@undefined
  \input plain.def\relax
\fi
%<</Load macros for plain if not LaTeX>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Multiple languages}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\language}
%    Plain \TeX\ version~3.0 provides the primitive |\language| that
%    is used to store the current language. When used with a pre-3.0
%    version this function has to be implemented by allocating a
%    counter. The following block is used in \file{switch.def} and
%    \file{hyphen.cfg}; the latter may seem redundant, but remember
%    \babel{} doesn't requires loading \file{switch.def} in the format.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Define core switching macros>>
\ifx\language\@undefined
  \csname newcount\endcsname\language
\fi
%<</Define core switching macros>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\last@language}
%    Another counter is used to store the last language defined.  For
%    pre-3.0 formats an extra counter has to be allocated.
%
%  \begin{macro}{\addlanguage}
%
%    To add languages to \TeX's memory plain \TeX\ version~3.0
%    supplies |\newlanguage|, in a pre-3.0 environment a similar macro
%    has to be provided. For both cases a new macro is defined here,
%    because the original |\newlanguage| was defined to be |\outer|.
%
%    For a format based on plain version~2.x, the definition of
%    |\newlanguage| can not be copied because |\count 19| is used for
%    other purposes in these formats. Therefore |\addlanguage| is
%    defined using a definition based on the macros used to define
%    |\newlanguage| in plain \TeX\ version~3.0.
%
%    For formats based on plain version~3.0 the definition of
%    |\newlanguage| can be simply copied, removing |\outer|.
%    Plain \TeX\ version 3.0 uses |\count 19| for this purpose.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Define core switching macros>>
\ifx\newlanguage\@undefined
  \csname newcount\endcsname\last@language
  \def\addlanguage#1{%
    \global\advance\last@language\@ne
    \ifnum\last@language<\@cclvi
    \else
      \errmessage{No room for a new \string\language!}%
    \fi
    \global\chardef#1\last@language
    \wlog{\string#1 = \string\language\the\last@language}}
\else
  \countdef\last@language=19
  \def\addlanguage{\alloc@9\language\chardef\@cclvi}
\fi
%<</Define core switching macros>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%    Now we make sure all required files are loaded.  When the command
%    |\AtBeginDocument| doesn't exist we assume that we are dealing
%    with a plain-based format or \LaTeX2.09. In that case the file
%    \file{plain.def} is needed (which also defines
%    |\AtBeginDocument|, and therefore it is not loaded twice). We
%    need the first part when the format is created, and |\orig@dump|
%    is used as a flag. Otherwise, we need to use the second part, so
%    |\orig@dump| is not defined (\file{plain.def} undefines it).
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/21}{Use \cs{orig@dump} as flag instead
%    of \cs{adddialect}}
%
%    Check if the current version of \file{switch.def} has been
%    previously loaded (mainly, \file{hyphen.cfg}). If not, load it
%    now. We cannot load |babel.def| here because we first need to
%    declare and process the package options.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/11}{Now switch.def is loaded always, so
%    that there is no need to rebuild formats just to update babel}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/13}{But switch.def is loaded only if
%    loaded in a different version (or not loaded)}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/01/14}{Added the debug option}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/02/05}{Added \cs{bbl@add}}
%
% \section{The Package File (\LaTeX, \texttt{babel.sty})}
%
%    In order to make use of the features of \LaTeXe, the \babel\
%    system contains a package file, \file{babel.sty}. This file is
%    loaded by the |\usepackage| command and defines all the language
%    options whose name is different from that of the |.ldf| file
%    (like variant spellings). It also takes care of a number of
%    compatibility issues with other packages an defines a few
%    aditional package options.
%
%
%    Apart from all the language options below we also have a few options
%    that influence the behavior of language definition files.
%
%    Many of the following options don't do anything themselves, they
%    are just defined in order to make it possible for babel and
%    language definition files to check if one of them was specified
%    by the user.
%
% \subsection{\texttt{base}}
%
%    The first option to be processed is |base|, which set the
%    hyphenation patterns then resets |ver@babel.sty| so that
%    \LaTeX forgets about the first loading. After |switch.def| has
%    been loaded (above) and |\AfterBabelLanguage| defined, exits.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/10/05}{preset option started,
%    party stolen from fontenc}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/10/17}{Hooks started}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/02/07}{Rejected preset, and replaced by
%   base}
% \changes{babel~3.9q}{2016/02/11}{Load patterns with option base.
%    To be improved. Moved showlanguages before base}
% \changes{babel~3.18}{2018/02/14}{Fix - prevent doble input of
%    switch.def}
% \changes{babel~3.19}{2018/04/23}{Split callback - vertical and
%    horizontal}
% \changes{babel~3.19}{2018/04/23}{Added bidi=basic, here and passim}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*package>
\NeedsTeXFormat{LaTeX2e}[2005/12/01]
\ProvidesPackage{babel}[<@date@> <@version@> The Babel package]
\@ifpackagewith{babel}{debug}
  {\providecommand\bbl@trace[1]{\message{^^J[ #1 ]}}%
   \let\bbl@debug\@firstofone}
  {\providecommand\bbl@trace[1]{}%
   \let\bbl@debug\@gobble}
\ifx\bbl@switchflag\@undefined % Prevent double input
  \let\bbl@switchflag\relax
  \input switch.def\relax
\fi
<@Load patterns in luatex@>
<@Basic macros@>
\def\AfterBabelLanguage#1{%
  \global\expandafter\bbl@add\csname#1.ldf-h@@k\endcsname}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% If the format created a list of loaded languages (in
% |\bbl@languages|), get the name of the 0-th to show the actual
% language used.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@languages\@undefined\else
  \begingroup
    \catcode`\^^I=12
    \@ifpackagewith{babel}{showlanguages}{%
      \begingroup
        \def\bbl@elt#1#2#3#4{\wlog{#2^^I#1^^I#3^^I#4}}%
        \wlog{<*languages>}%
        \bbl@languages
        \wlog{</languages>}%
      \endgroup}{}
  \endgroup
  \def\bbl@elt#1#2#3#4{%
    \ifnum#2=\z@
      \gdef\bbl@nulllanguage{#1}%
      \def\bbl@elt##1##2##3##4{}%
    \fi}%
  \bbl@languages
\fi
\ifodd\bbl@engine
  \let\bbl@tempa\relax
  \@ifpackagewith{babel}{bidi=basic}%
    {\def\bbl@tempa{basic}}%
    {\@ifpackagewith{babel}{bidi=basic-r}%
      {\def\bbl@tempa{basic-r}}%
      {}}
  \ifx\bbl@tempa\relax\else
    \let\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode
    \AtEndOfPackage{\EnableBabelHook{babel-bidi}}%
    \RequirePackage{luatexbase}%
    \directlua{
      require('babel-bidi.lua')
      require('babel-bidi-\bbl@tempa.lua')
      luatexbase.add_to_callback('pre_linebreak_filter',
        Babel.pre_otfload_v,
        'Babel.pre_otfload_v',
        luatexbase.priority_in_callback('pre_linebreak_filter',
          'luaotfload.node_processor') or nil)
      luatexbase.add_to_callback('hpack_filter',
        Babel.pre_otfload_h,
        'Babel.pre_otfload_h',
        luatexbase.priority_in_callback('hpack_filter',
          'luaotfload.node_processor') or nil)
     }
  \fi
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Now the \texttt{base} option. With it we can define (and load, with
% \luatex) hyphenation patterns, even if we are not interesed in the
% rest of babel. Useful for old versions of \textsf{polyglossia}, too.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Defining option 'base'}
\@ifpackagewith{babel}{base}{%
  \ifx\directlua\@undefined
    \DeclareOption*{\bbl@patterns{\CurrentOption}}%
  \else
    \DeclareOption*{\bbl@patterns@lua{\CurrentOption}}%
  \fi
  \DeclareOption{base}{}%
  \DeclareOption{showlanguages}{}%
  \ProcessOptions
  \global\expandafter\let\csname opt@babel.sty\endcsname\relax
  \global\expandafter\let\csname ver@babel.sty\endcsname\relax
  \global\let\@ifl@ter@@\@ifl@ter
  \def\@ifl@ter#1#2#3#4#5{\global\let\@ifl@ter\@ifl@ter@@}%
  \endinput}{}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{\texttt{key=value} options and other general option}
%
%    The following macros extract language modifiers, and only real
%    package options are kept in the option list. Modifiers are saved
%    and assigned to |\BabelModifiers| at |\bbl@load@language|; when
%    no modifiers have been given, the former is |\relax|. How
%    modifiers are handled are left to language styles; they can use
%    |\in@|, loop them with |\@for| or load |keyval|, for example.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9e}{2013/04/15}{Bug fixed - a dot was added in
%    key=value pairs}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{key=value and another general options}
\bbl@csarg\let{tempa\expandafter}\csname opt@babel.sty\endcsname
\def\bbl@tempb#1.#2{%
   #1\ifx\@empty#2\else,\bbl@afterfi\bbl@tempb#2\fi}%
\def\bbl@tempd#1.#2\@nnil{%
  \ifx\@empty#2%
    \edef\bbl@tempc{\ifx\bbl@tempc\@empty\else\bbl@tempc,\fi#1}%
  \else
    \in@{=}{#1}\ifin@
      \edef\bbl@tempc{\ifx\bbl@tempc\@empty\else\bbl@tempc,\fi#1.#2}%
    \else
      \edef\bbl@tempc{\ifx\bbl@tempc\@empty\else\bbl@tempc,\fi#1}%
      \bbl@csarg\edef{mod@#1}{\bbl@tempb#2}%
    \fi
  \fi}
\let\bbl@tempc\@empty
\bbl@foreach\bbl@tempa{\bbl@tempd#1.\@empty\@nnil}
\expandafter\let\csname opt@babel.sty\endcsname\bbl@tempc
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The next option tells \babel\ to leave shorthand characters active
% at the end of processing the package. This is \emph{not} the default
% as it can cause problems with other packages, but for those who want
% to use the shorthand characters in the preamble of their documents
% this can help.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/14}{Implemented the \texttt{noconfigs}
%    option}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/26}{Implemented the
%    \texttt{showlanguages} option}
% \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/08/07}{Options for hyphenmap}
% \changes{babel~3.9l}{2014/07/29}{Option \texttt{silent}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\DeclareOption{KeepShorthandsActive}{}
\DeclareOption{activeacute}{}
\DeclareOption{activegrave}{}
\DeclareOption{debug}{}
\DeclareOption{noconfigs}{}
\DeclareOption{showlanguages}{}
\DeclareOption{silent}{}
\DeclareOption{shorthands=off}{\bbl@tempa shorthands=\bbl@tempa}
<@More package options@>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Handling of package options is done in three passes. (I [JBL] am not
% very happy with the idea, anyway.) The first one processes options
% which has been declared above or follow the syntax |<key>=<value>|,
% the second one loads the requested languages, except the main one if
% set with the key |main|, and the third one loads the latter. First,
% we ``flag'' valid keys with a nil value.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/10}{Added the `safe' key, including code
%    below for selecting the redefined macros}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\bbl@opt@shorthands\@nnil
\let\bbl@opt@config\@nnil
\let\bbl@opt@main\@nnil
\let\bbl@opt@headfoot\@nnil
\let\bbl@opt@layout\@nnil
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The following tool is defined temporarily to store the values of
% options.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@tempa#1=#2\bbl@tempa{%
  \bbl@csarg\ifx{opt@#1}\@nnil
    \bbl@csarg\edef{opt@#1}{#2}%
  \else
    \bbl@error{%
      Bad option `#1=#2'. Either you have misspelled the\\%
      key or there is a previous setting of `#1'}{%
      Valid keys are `shorthands', `config', `strings', `main',\\%
      `headfoot', `safe', `math', among others.}
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Now the option list is processed, taking into account only currently
% declared options (including those declared with a |=|), and
% |<key>=<value>| options (the former take precedence).  Unrecognized
% options are saved in |\bbl@language@opts|, because they are language
% options.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\bbl@language@opts\@empty
\DeclareOption*{%
  \bbl@xin@{\string=}{\CurrentOption}%
  \ifin@
    \expandafter\bbl@tempa\CurrentOption\bbl@tempa
  \else
    \bbl@add@list\bbl@language@opts{\CurrentOption}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now we finish the first pass (and start over).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProcessOptions*
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Conditional loading of shorthands}
%
%    If there is no |shorthands=<chars>|, the original \textsf{babel}
%    macros are left untouched, but if there is, these macros are
%    wrapped (in |babel.def|) to define only those given.
%
%    A bit of optimization: if there is no |shorthands=|, then
%    |\bbl@ifshorthands| is always true, and it is always false if
%    |shorthands| is empty. Also, some code makes sense only with
%    |shorthands=...|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9c}{2013/04/07}{Added t and c for tilde and comma}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Conditional loading of shorthands}
\def\bbl@sh@string#1{%
  \ifx#1\@empty\else
    \ifx#1t\string~%
    \else\ifx#1c\string,%
    \else\string#1%
    \fi\fi
    \expandafter\bbl@sh@string
  \fi}
\ifx\bbl@opt@shorthands\@nnil
  \def\bbl@ifshorthand#1#2#3{#2}%
\else\ifx\bbl@opt@shorthands\@empty
  \def\bbl@ifshorthand#1#2#3{#3}%
\else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following macro tests if a shortand is one of the allowed
%    ones.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \def\bbl@ifshorthand#1{%
    \bbl@xin@{\string#1}{\bbl@opt@shorthands}%
    \ifin@
      \expandafter\@firstoftwo
    \else
      \expandafter\@secondoftwo
    \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We make sure all chars in the string are `other', with the help
%    of an auxiliary macro defined above (which also zaps spaces).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \edef\bbl@opt@shorthands{%
    \expandafter\bbl@sh@string\bbl@opt@shorthands\@empty}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following is ignored with |shorthands=off|, since it is
%    intended to take some aditional actions for certain chars.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@ifshorthand{'}%
    {\PassOptionsToPackage{activeacute}{babel}}{}
  \bbl@ifshorthand{`}%
    {\PassOptionsToPackage{activegrave}{babel}}{}
\fi\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/30}{Code setting language in
%    head/foots.  Related to babel/3796}
%
%    With |headfoot=lang| we can set the language used in heads/foots.
%    For example, in babel/3796 just adds |headfoot=english|.  It
%    misuses \cs{@resetactivechars} but seems to work.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@opt@headfoot\@nnil\else
  \g@addto@macro\@resetactivechars{%
    \set@typeset@protect
    \expandafter\select@language@x\expandafter{\bbl@opt@headfoot}%
    \let\protect\noexpand}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% For the option safe we use a different approach -- |\bbl@opt@safe|
% says which macros are redefined (B for bibs and R for refs). By
% default, both are set.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@opt@safe\@undefined
  \def\bbl@opt@safe{BR}
\fi
\ifx\bbl@opt@main\@nnil\else
  \edef\bbl@language@opts{%
    \ifx\bbl@language@opts\@empty\else\bbl@language@opts,\fi
      \bbl@opt@main}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% For |layout| an auxiliary macro is provided, available for packages
% and language styles.
%
% \changes{babel~3.16}{2018/01/02}{Added the basic layout stuff and the
%  macro \cs{IfBabelLayout}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Defining IfBabelLayout}
\ifx\bbl@opt@layout\@nnil
  \newcommand\IfBabelLayout[3]{#3}%
\else
  \newcommand\IfBabelLayout[1]{%
    \@expandtwoargs\in@{.#1.}{.\bbl@opt@layout.}%
    \ifin@
      \expandafter\@firstoftwo
    \else
      \expandafter\@secondoftwo
    \fi}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Language options}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/15}{Rewritten the loading mechanism, so
%    that languages not declared are also correctly recognized, even
%    if given as global options}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/12}{Revised the loading mechanism}
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/03/01}{Removed German options, because
%    they are now loaded directly}
%
%    Languages are loaded when processing the corresponding option
%    \textit{except} if a |main| language has been set. In such a
%    case, it is not loaded until all options has been processed.
%    The following macro inputs the ldf file and does some additional
%    checks (|\input| works, too, but possible errors are not catched).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Language options}
\let\bbl@afterlang\relax
\let\BabelModifiers\relax
\let\bbl@loaded\@empty
\def\bbl@load@language#1{%
  \InputIfFileExists{#1.ldf}%
    {\edef\bbl@loaded{\CurrentOption
       \ifx\bbl@loaded\@empty\else,\bbl@loaded\fi}%
     \expandafter\let\expandafter\bbl@afterlang
        \csname\CurrentOption.ldf-h@@k\endcsname
     \expandafter\let\expandafter\BabelModifiers
        \csname bbl@mod@\CurrentOption\endcsname}%
    {\bbl@error{%
       Unknown option `\CurrentOption'. Either you misspelled it\\%
       or the language definition file \CurrentOption.ldf was not found}{%
       Valid options are: shorthands=, KeepShorthandsActive,\\%
       activeacute, activegrave, noconfigs, safe=, main=, math=\\%
       headfoot=, strings=, config=, hyphenmap=, or a language name.}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now, we set language options whose names are different from |ldf| files.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9t}{2017/04/23}{Removed options for English, Indonesian and
%    Malay, now handled with proxy files}
% \changes{babel~3.13}{2017/08/24}{Removed options for French,
%    too. ldf files now takes priority if exist, except Hebrew (to do)}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@try@load@lang#1#2#3{%
    \IfFileExists{\CurrentOption.ldf}%
      {\bbl@load@language{\CurrentOption}}%
      {#1\bbl@load@language{#2}#3}}
\DeclareOption{afrikaans}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{dutch}{}}
\DeclareOption{brazil}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{portuges}{}}
\DeclareOption{brazilian}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{portuges}{}}
\DeclareOption{hebrew}{%
  \input{rlbabel.def}%
  \bbl@load@language{hebrew}}
\DeclareOption{hungarian}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{magyar}{}}
\DeclareOption{lowersorbian}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{lsorbian}{}}
\DeclareOption{nynorsk}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{norsk}{}}
\DeclareOption{polutonikogreek}{%
  \bbl@try@load@lang{}{greek}{\languageattribute{greek}{polutoniko}}}
\DeclareOption{portuguese}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{portuges}{}}
\DeclareOption{russian}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{russianb}{}}
\DeclareOption{ukrainian}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{ukraineb}{}}
\DeclareOption{uppersorbian}{\bbl@try@load@lang{}{usorbian}{}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Another way to extend the list of `known' options for \babel\ was
%    to create the file \file{bblopts.cfg} in which one can add option
%    declarations. However, this mechanism is deprecated -- if you
%    want an alternative name for a language, just create a new |.ldf|
%    file loading the actual one. You can also set the name
%    of the file with the package option |config=<name>|, which will
%    load |<name>.cfg| instead.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/28}{Added the \cs{AfterBabelLanguage}
%    mechanism, to be used mainly with the local cfg file.}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/31}{Now you can set the name of the
%    local cfg file.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@opt@config\@nnil
  \@ifpackagewith{babel}{noconfigs}{}%
    {\InputIfFileExists{bblopts.cfg}%
      {\typeout{*************************************^^J%
               * Local config file bblopts.cfg used^^J%
               *}}%
      {}}%
\else
  \InputIfFileExists{\bbl@opt@config.cfg}%
    {\typeout{*************************************^^J%
             * Local config file \bbl@opt@config.cfg used^^J%
             *}}%
    {\bbl@error{%
       Local config file `\bbl@opt@config.cfg' not found}{%
       Perhaps you misspelled it.}}%
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Recognizing global options in packages not having a closed set of
%    them is not trivial, as for them to be processed they must be
%    defined explicitly. So, package options not yet taken into
%    account and stored in |bbl@language@opts| are assumed to be
%    languages (note this list also contains the language given with
%    |main|). If not declared above, the name of the option and the
%    file are the same.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@for\bbl@tempa\bbl@language@opts{%
  \bbl@ifunset{ds@\bbl@tempa}%
    {\edef\bbl@tempb{%
       \noexpand\DeclareOption
         {\bbl@tempa}%
         {\noexpand\bbl@load@language{\bbl@tempa}}}%
     \bbl@tempb}%
     \@empty}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now, we make sure an option is explicitly declared for any
%    language set as global option, by checking if an |ldf|
%    exists. The previous step was, in fact, somewhat redundant, but
%    that way we minimize accesing the file system just to see if the
%    option could be a language.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@foreach\@classoptionslist{%
  \bbl@ifunset{ds@#1}%
    {\IfFileExists{#1.ldf}%
      {\DeclareOption{#1}{\bbl@load@language{#1}}}%
      {}}%
    {}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    If a main language has been set, store it for the third pass.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@opt@main\@nnil\else
  \expandafter
  \let\expandafter\bbl@loadmain\csname ds@\bbl@opt@main\endcsname
  \DeclareOption{\bbl@opt@main}{}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    And we are done, because all options for this pass has been
%    declared. Those already processed in the first pass are just
%    ignored.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/22}{Default option does nothing}
%
%    The options have to be processed in the order in which the user
%    specified them (except, of course, global options, which \LaTeX{}
%    processes before):
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\AfterBabelLanguage#1{%
  \bbl@ifsamestring\CurrentOption{#1}{\global\bbl@add\bbl@afterlang}{}}
\DeclareOption*{}
\ProcessOptions*
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    This finished the second pass. Now the third one begins, which
%    loads the main language set with the key |main|. A warning is
%    raised if the main language is not the same as the last named
%    one, or if the value of the key |main| is not a language. Then
%    execute directly the option (because it could be used only in
%    |main|). After loading all languages, we deactivate
%    |\AfterBabelLanguage|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@opt@main\@nnil
  \edef\bbl@tempa{\@classoptionslist,\bbl@language@opts}
  \let\bbl@tempc\@empty
  \bbl@for\bbl@tempb\bbl@tempa{%
    \bbl@xin@{,\bbl@tempb,}{,\bbl@loaded,}%
    \ifin@\edef\bbl@tempc{\bbl@tempb}\fi}
  \def\bbl@tempa#1,#2\@nnil{\def\bbl@tempb{#1}}
  \expandafter\bbl@tempa\bbl@loaded,\@nnil
  \ifx\bbl@tempb\bbl@tempc\else
    \bbl@warning{%
      Last declared language option is `\bbl@tempc',\\%
      but the last processed one was `\bbl@tempb'.\\%
      The main language cannot be set as both a global\\%
      and a package option. Use `main=\bbl@tempc' as\\%
      option. Reported}%
  \fi
\else
  \DeclareOption{\bbl@opt@main}{\bbl@loadmain}
  \ExecuteOptions{\bbl@opt@main}
  \DeclareOption*{}
  \ProcessOptions*
\fi
\def\AfterBabelLanguage{%
  \bbl@error
    {Too late for \string\AfterBabelLanguage}%
    {Languages have been loaded, so I can do nothing}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    In order to catch the case where the user forgot to specify a
%    language we check whether |\bbl@main@language|, has become
%    defined. If not, no language has been loaded and an error
%    message is displayed.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/24}{Now babel is not loaded to prevent
%    the document from raising errors after fixing it}
% \changes{babel~3.21}{2018/05/09}{Requesting a language is no required
%    any more, in case you only need \cs{babelprovide}.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@main@language\@undefined
  \bbl@info{%
    You haven't specified a language. I'll use 'nil'\\%
    as the main language. Reported}
    \bbl@load@language{nil}
\fi
%</package>
%<*core>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \section{The kernel of Babel (\texttt{babel.def}, common)}
%
% The kernel of the \babel\ system is stored in either
% \file{hyphen.cfg} or \file{switch.def} and \file{babel.def}.  The
% file \file{babel.def} contains most of the code, while
% \file{switch.def} defines the language switching commands; both can
% be read at run time. The file \file{hyphen.cfg} is a file that can
% be loaded into the format, which is necessary when you want to be
% able to switch hyphenation patterns (by default, it also inputs
% \file{switch.def}, for ``historical reasons'', but it is not
% necessary). When \file{babel.def} is loaded it checks if the current
% version of \file{switch.def} is in the format; if not, it is
% loaded. A further file, \file{babel.sty}, contains \LaTeX-specific
% stuff.
%
% Because plain \TeX\ users might want to use some of the features of
% the \babel{} system too, care has to be taken that plain \TeX\ can
% process the files. For this reason the current format will have to
% be checked in a number of places. Some of the code below is common
% to plain \TeX\ and \LaTeX, some of it is for the \LaTeX\ case only.
%
% Plain formats based on etex (etex, xetex, luatex) don't load
% |hyphen.cfg| but |etex.src|, which follows a different naming
% convention, so we need to define the babel names. It presumes
% |language.def| exists and it is the same file used when formats were
% created.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/01/11}{Added \cs{bbl@for} for loops
%    ignoring empties}
% \changes{babel~3.9c}{2013/04/06}{Normalize \cs{bbl@afterlang} to
%    relax}
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/03/10}{Make sure \cs{bbl@language@opts}
%    is defined.}
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/03/11}{Define \cs{l@} values from
%   \cs{lang@} values set in Plain etex/xetex/luatex}
%
% \subsection{Tools}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/03/24}{Added definition for
%    \cs{uselanguage}}
% \changes{babel~3.9n}{2015/12/21}{Define a few macros for 2.09}
% \changes{babel~3.9p}{2016/02/05}{Added a test for lua(e)tex.}
% \changes{babel~3.9q}{2016/02/12}{Load lua patterns if not lualatex.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\ldf@quit\@undefined
\else
  \expandafter\endinput
\fi
<@Make sure ProvidesFile is defined@>
\ProvidesFile{babel.def}[<@date@> <@version@> Babel common definitions]
<@Load macros for plain if not LaTeX@>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The file |babel.def| expects some definitions made in the \LaTeXe{}
% style file. So, In \LaTeX2.09 and Plain{} we must provide at least
% some predefined values as well some tools to set them (even if not
% all options are available). There in no package options, and
% therefore and alternative mechanism is provided. For the moment,
% only |\babeloptionstrings| and |\babeloptionmath| are provided,
% which can be defined before loading \babel. |\BabelModifiers| can be
% set too (but not sure it works).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@ifshorthand\@undefined
  \let\bbl@opt@shorthands\@nnil
  \def\bbl@ifshorthand#1#2#3{#2}%
  \let\bbl@language@opts\@empty
  \ifx\babeloptionstrings\@undefined
    \let\bbl@opt@strings\@nnil
  \else
    \let\bbl@opt@strings\babeloptionstrings
  \fi
  \def\BabelStringsDefault{generic}
  \def\bbl@tempa{normal}
  \ifx\babeloptionmath\bbl@tempa
    \def\bbl@mathnormal{\noexpand\textormath}
  \fi
  \def\AfterBabelLanguage#1#2{}
  \ifx\BabelModifiers\@undefined\let\BabelModifiers\relax\fi
  \let\bbl@afterlang\relax
  \def\bbl@opt@safe{BR}
  \ifx\@uclclist\@undefined\let\@uclclist\@empty\fi
  \ifx\bbl@trace\@undefined\def\bbl@trace#1{}\fi
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% And continue.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@switchflag\@undefined % Prevent double input
  \let\bbl@switchflag\relax
  \input switch.def\relax
\fi
\bbl@trace{Compatibility with language.def}
\ifx\bbl@languages\@undefined
  \ifx\directlua\@undefined
    \openin1 = language.def
    \ifeof1
      \closein1
      \message{I couldn't find the file language.def}
    \else
      \closein1
      \begingroup
        \def\addlanguage#1#2#3#4#5{%
          \expandafter\ifx\csname lang@#1\endcsname\relax\else
            \global\expandafter\let\csname l@#1\expandafter\endcsname
              \csname lang@#1\endcsname
          \fi}%
        \def\uselanguage#1{}%
        \input language.def
      \endgroup
    \fi
  \fi
  \chardef\l@english\z@
\fi
<@Load patterns in luatex@>
<@Basic macros@>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\addto}
%    For each language four control sequences have to be defined that
%    control the language-specific definitions. To be able to add
%    something to these macro once they have been defined the macro
%    |\addto| is introduced. It takes two arguments, a \meta{control
%    sequence} and \TeX-code to be added to the \meta{control
%    sequence}.
%
%    If the \meta{control sequence} has not been defined before it is
%    defined now.  The control sequence could also expand to |\relax|,
%    in which case a circular definition results. The net result is a
%    stack overflow.  Otherwise the replacement text for the
%    \meta{control sequence} is expanded and stored in a token
%    register, together with the \TeX-code to be added.  Finally the
%    \meta{control sequence} is \emph{re}defined, using the contents
%    of the token register.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\addto#1#2{%
  \ifx#1\@undefined
    \def#1{#2}%
  \else
    \ifx#1\relax
      \def#1{#2}%
    \else
      {\toks@\expandafter{#1#2}%
       \xdef#1{\the\toks@}}%
    \fi
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/10}{Removed the \cs{peek@token} and
%    \textsc{test@token} stuff}
%
%    The macro |\initiate@active@char| takes all the necessary actions
%    to make its argument a shorthand character. The real work is
%    performed once for each character.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{1999/04/30}{Added \cs{bbl@withactive}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@withactive#1#2{%
  \begingroup
    \lccode`~=`#2\relax
    \lowercase{\endgroup#1~}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@redefine}
%    To redefine a command, we save the old meaning of the macro.
%    Then we redefine it to call the original macro with the
%    `sanitized' argument.  The reason why we do it this way is that
%    we don't want to redefine the \LaTeX\ macros completely in case
%    their definitions change (they have changed in the past).
%
%    Because we need to redefine a number of commands we define the
%    command |\bbl@redefine| which takes care of this. It creates a
%    new control sequence, |\org@...|
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@redefine#1{%
  \edef\bbl@tempa{\bbl@stripslash#1}%
  \expandafter\let\csname org@\bbl@tempa\endcsname#1%
  \expandafter\def\csname\bbl@tempa\endcsname}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    This command should only be used in the preamble of the document.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@onlypreamble\bbl@redefine
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@redefine@long}
%    This version of |\babel@redefine| can be used to redefine |\long|
%    commands such as |\ifthenelse|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@redefine@long#1{%
  \edef\bbl@tempa{\bbl@stripslash#1}%
  \expandafter\let\csname org@\bbl@tempa\endcsname#1%
  \expandafter\long\expandafter\def\csname\bbl@tempa\endcsname}
\@onlypreamble\bbl@redefine@long
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@redefinerobust}
%    For commands that are redefined, but which \textit{might} be
%    robust we need a slightly more intelligent macro. A robust
%    command |foo| is defined to expand to |\protect|\verb*|\foo |. So
%    it is necessary to check whether \verb*|\foo | exists. The result
%    is that the command that is being redefined is always robust
%    afterwards.  Therefore all we need to do now is define \verb*|\foo |.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@redefinerobust#1{%
  \edef\bbl@tempa{\bbl@stripslash#1}%
  \bbl@ifunset{\bbl@tempa\space}%
    {\expandafter\let\csname org@\bbl@tempa\endcsname#1%
     \bbl@exp{\def\\#1{\\\protect\<\bbl@tempa\space>}}}%
    {\bbl@exp{\let\<org@\bbl@tempa>\<\bbl@tempa\space>}}%
    \@namedef{\bbl@tempa\space}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    This command should only be used in the preamble of the document.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@onlypreamble\bbl@redefinerobust
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Hooks}
%
%  Note they are loaded in babel.def. switch.def only provides a
%  ``hook'' for hooks (with a default value which is a no-op,
%  below). Admittedly, the current implementation is a somewhat
%  simplistic and does vety little to catch errors, but it is intended
%  for developpers, after all. |\bbl@usehooks| is the commands used by
%  babel to execute hooks defined for an event.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/03/23}{Removed a \cs{newcommand},
%    undefined in Plain}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Hooks}
\def\AddBabelHook#1#2{%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@hk@#1}{\EnableBabelHook{#1}}{}%
  \def\bbl@tempa##1,#2=##2,##3\@empty{\def\bbl@tempb{##2}}%
  \expandafter\bbl@tempa\bbl@evargs,#2=,\@empty
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@ev@#1@#2}%
    {\bbl@csarg\bbl@add{ev@#2}{\bbl@elt{#1}}%
     \bbl@csarg\newcommand}%
    {\bbl@csarg\let{ev@#1@#2}\relax
     \bbl@csarg\newcommand}%
  {ev@#1@#2}[\bbl@tempb]}
\def\EnableBabelHook#1{\bbl@csarg\let{hk@#1}\@firstofone}
\def\DisableBabelHook#1{\bbl@csarg\let{hk@#1}\@gobble}
\def\bbl@usehooks#1#2{%
  \def\bbl@elt##1{%
    \@nameuse{bbl@hk@##1}{\@nameuse{bbl@ev@##1@#1}#2}}%
  \@nameuse{bbl@ev@#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    To ensure forward compatibility, arguments in hooks are set
%    implicitly. So, if a further argument is added in the future,
%    there is no need to change the existing code. Note events
%    intended for \textsf{hyphen.cfg} are also loaded (just in
%    case you need them for some reason).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@evargs{,% don't delete the comma
  everylanguage=1,loadkernel=1,loadpatterns=1,loadexceptions=1,%
  adddialect=2,patterns=2,defaultcommands=0,encodedcommands=2,write=0,%
  beforeextras=0,afterextras=0,stopcommands=0,stringprocess=0,%
  hyphenation=2,initiateactive=3,afterreset=0,foreign=0,foreign*=0}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \begin{macro}{\babelensure}
%
% The user command just parses the optional argument and creates a
% new macro named |\bbl@e@|\m{language}. We register a hook at the
% |afterextras| event which just executes this macro in a
% ``complete'' selection (which, if undefined, is |\relax| and does
% nothing). This part is somewhat involved because we have to make
% sure things are expanded the correct number of times.
%
% The macro |\bbl@e@|\m{language} contains
% |\bbl@ensure|\marg{include}\marg{exclude}\marg{fontenc}, which in in
% turn loops over the macros names in |\bbl@captionslist|, excluding
% (with the help of |\in@|) those in the |exclude| list. If the
% |fontenc| is given (and not |\relax|), the |\fontencoding| is also
% added. Then we loop over the |include| list, but if the macro
% already contains |\foreignlanguage|, nothing is done.  Note this
% macro (1) is not restricted to the preamble, and (2) changes are
% local.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/02/14}{Macro \cs{babelensure} added}
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/03/23}{Encapsulate \cs{foreignlanguage} in
%   \cs{bbl@ensure@}language, to "protect" strings}
% \changes{babel~3.9s}{2017/04/10}{Bug fix - extra spaces because a
%   missing percent}
% \changes{babel~3.9s}{2017/04/10}{\cs{bbl@ensure@lang} defined only
%   once}
% \changes{babel~3.10}{2017/05/06}{\cs{bbl@ensured} renamed to
%   \cs{bbl@captionslist} (for \cs{babelprovide}), which means
%   \cs{today} must be given explicitly in \cs{babelensure}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Defining babelensure}
\newcommand\babelensure[2][]{%  TODO - revise test files
  \AddBabelHook{babel-ensure}{afterextras}{%
    \ifcase\bbl@select@type
      \@nameuse{bbl@e@\languagename}%
    \fi}%
  \begingroup
    \let\bbl@ens@include\@empty
    \let\bbl@ens@exclude\@empty
    \def\bbl@ens@fontenc{\relax}%
    \def\bbl@tempb##1{%
      \ifx\@empty##1\else\noexpand##1\expandafter\bbl@tempb\fi}%
    \edef\bbl@tempa{\bbl@tempb#1\@empty}%
    \def\bbl@tempb##1=##2\@@{\@namedef{bbl@ens@##1}{##2}}%
    \bbl@foreach\bbl@tempa{\bbl@tempb##1\@@}%
    \def\bbl@tempc{\bbl@ensure}%
    \expandafter\bbl@add\expandafter\bbl@tempc\expandafter{%
      \expandafter{\bbl@ens@include}}%
    \expandafter\bbl@add\expandafter\bbl@tempc\expandafter{%
      \expandafter{\bbl@ens@exclude}}%
    \toks@\expandafter{\bbl@tempc}%
    \bbl@exp{%
  \endgroup
  \def\<bbl@e@#2>{\the\toks@{\bbl@ens@fontenc}}}}
\def\bbl@ensure#1#2#3{% 1: include 2: exclude 3: fontenc
  \def\bbl@tempb##1{% elt for (excluding) \bbl@captionslist list
    \ifx##1\@empty\else
      \in@{##1}{#2}%
      \ifin@\else
        \bbl@ifunset{bbl@ensure@\languagename}%
          {\bbl@exp{%
            \\\DeclareRobustCommand\<bbl@ensure@\languagename>[1]{%
              \\\foreignlanguage{\languagename}%
              {\ifx\relax#3\else
                \\\fontencoding{#3}\\\selectfont
               \fi
               ########1}}}}%
          {}%
        \toks@\expandafter{##1}%
        \edef##1{%
           \bbl@csarg\noexpand{ensure@\languagename}%
           {\the\toks@}}%
      \fi
      \expandafter\bbl@tempb
    \fi}%
  \expandafter\bbl@tempb\bbl@captionslist\today\@empty
  \def\bbl@tempa##1{% elt for include list
    \ifx##1\@empty\else
      \bbl@csarg\in@{ensure@\languagename\expandafter}\expandafter{##1}%
      \ifin@\else
        \bbl@tempb##1\@empty
      \fi
      \expandafter\bbl@tempa
    \fi}%
  \bbl@tempa#1\@empty}
\def\bbl@captionslist{%
  \prefacename\refname\abstractname\bibname\chaptername\appendixname
  \contentsname\listfigurename\listtablename\indexname\figurename
  \tablename\partname\enclname\ccname\headtoname\pagename\seename
  \alsoname\proofname\glossaryname}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Setting up language files}
%
% \begin{macro}{\LdfInit}
%    The second version of |\LdfInit| macro takes two arguments. The first
%    argument is the name of the language that will be defined in the
%    language definition file; the second argument is either a control
%    sequence or a string from which a control sequence should be
%    constructed. The existence of the control sequence indicates that
%    the file has been processed before.
%
%    At the start of processing a language definition file we always
%    check the category code of the at-sign. We make sure that it is
%    a `letter' during the processing of the file. We also save its
%    name as the last called option, even if not loaded.
%
%    Another character that needs to have the correct category code
%    during processing of language definition files is the equals sign,
%    `=', because it is sometimes used in constructions with the
%    |\let| primitive. Therefore we store its current catcode and
%    restore it later on.
%
%    Now we check whether we should perhaps stop the processing of
%    this file. To do this we first need to check whether the second
%    argument that is passed to |\LdfInit| is a control sequence. We
%    do that by looking at the first token after passing |#2| through
%    |string|. When it is equal to |\@backslashchar| we are dealing
%    with a control sequence which we can compare with |\@undefined|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/11}{\cs{ldf@quit} is not delayed any
%   more after \cs{fi} , since \cs{endinput} is not executed
%   immediately}
% \changes{babel~3.9g}{2012/08/11}{Preset the ``family'' of macros
%   \cs{Babel}...}
%
%   If so, we call |\ldf@quit| to set the main language, restore the
%   category code of the @-sign and call |\endinput|
%
%    When |#2| was \emph{not} a control sequence we construct one and
%    compare it with |\relax|.
%
%    Finally we check |\originalTeX|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Macros for setting language files up}
\def\bbl@ldfinit{%
  \let\bbl@screset\@empty
  \let\BabelStrings\bbl@opt@string
  \let\BabelOptions\@empty
  \let\BabelLanguages\relax
  \ifx\originalTeX\@undefined
    \let\originalTeX\@empty
  \else
    \originalTeX
  \fi}
\def\LdfInit#1#2{%
  \chardef\atcatcode=\catcode`\@
  \catcode`\@=11\relax
  \chardef\eqcatcode=\catcode`\=
  \catcode`\==12\relax
  \expandafter\if\expandafter\@backslashchar
                 \expandafter\@car\string#2\@nil
    \ifx#2\@undefined\else
      \ldf@quit{#1}%
    \fi
  \else
    \expandafter\ifx\csname#2\endcsname\relax\else
      \ldf@quit{#1}%
    \fi
  \fi
  \bbl@ldfinit}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\ldf@quit}
%    This macro interrupts the processing of a language definition file.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\ldf@quit#1{%
  \expandafter\main@language\expandafter{#1}%
  \catcode`\@=\atcatcode \let\atcatcode\relax
  \catcode`\==\eqcatcode \let\eqcatcode\relax
  \endinput}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\ldf@finish}
%    This macro takes one argument. It is the name of the language
%    that was defined in the language definition file.
%
%    We load the local configuration file if one is present, we set
%    the main language (taking into account that the argument might be
%    a control sequence that needs to be expanded) and reset the
%    category code of the @-sign.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/10/01}{Added \cs{bbl@afterlang} which
%    executes the code delayed with \cs{AfterBabelLanguage}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@afterldf#1{%
  \bbl@afterlang
  \let\bbl@afterlang\relax
  \let\BabelModifiers\relax
  \let\bbl@screset\relax}%
\def\ldf@finish#1{%
  \loadlocalcfg{#1}%
  \bbl@afterldf{#1}%
  \expandafter\main@language\expandafter{#1}%
  \catcode`\@=\atcatcode \let\atcatcode\relax
  \catcode`\==\eqcatcode \let\eqcatcode\relax}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%    After the preamble of the document the commands |\LdfInit|,
%    |\ldf@quit| and |\ldf@finish| are no longer needed. Therefore
%    they are turned into warning messages in \LaTeX.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@onlypreamble\LdfInit
\@onlypreamble\ldf@quit
\@onlypreamble\ldf@finish
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\main@language}
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@main@language}
%    This command should be used in the various language definition
%    files. It stores its argument in |\bbl@main@language|; to be used
%    to switch to the correct language at the beginning of the
%    document.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8l}{2008/07/06}{Use \cs{bbl@patterns}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\main@language#1{%
  \def\bbl@main@language{#1}%
  \let\languagename\bbl@main@language
  \bbl@patterns{\languagename}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We also have to make sure that some code gets executed at the
%    beginning of the document. Languages does not set |\pagedir|, so
%    we set here for the whole document to the main |\bodydir|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AtBeginDocument{%
  \expandafter\selectlanguage\expandafter{\bbl@main@language}%
  \ifcase\bbl@engine\or\pagedir\bodydir\fi}  % TODO - a better place
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% A bit of optimization. Select in heads/foots the language only if
% necessary.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\select@language@x#1{%
  \ifcase\bbl@select@type
    \bbl@ifsamestring\languagename{#1}{}{\select@language{#1}}%
  \else
    \select@language{#1}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Shorthands}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@add@special}
%    The macro |\bbl@add@special| is used to add a new character (or
%    single character control sequence) to the macro |\dospecials|
%    (and |\@sanitize| if \LaTeX\ is used). It is used only at one
%    place, namely when |\initiate@active@char| is called (which is
%    ignored if the char has been made active before).  Because
%    |\@sanitize| can be undefined, we put the definition inside a
%    conditional.
%
%    Items are added to the lists without checking its existence or
%    the original catcode. It does not hurt, but should be fixed. It's
%    already done with |\nfss@catcodes|, added in 3.10.
%
% \changes{3.10}{2017/05/14}{Refactored. Add to \cs{nfss@catcodes} too.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Shorhands}
\def\bbl@add@special#1{% 1:a macro like \", \?, etc.
  \bbl@add\dospecials{\do#1}% test @sanitize = \relax, for back. compat.
  \bbl@ifunset{@sanitize}{}{\bbl@add\@sanitize{\@makeother#1}}%
  \ifx\nfss@catcodes\@undefined\else % TODO - same for above
    \begingroup
      \catcode`#1\active
      \nfss@catcodes
      \ifnum\catcode`#1=\active
        \endgroup
        \bbl@add\nfss@catcodes{\@makeother#1}%
      \else
        \endgroup
      \fi
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@remove@special}
%
%    The companion of the former macro is |\bbl@remove@special|.  It
%    removes a character from the set macros |\dospecials| and
%    |\@sanitize|, but it is not used at all in the \babel{} core.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@remove@special#1{%
  \begingroup
    \def\x##1##2{\ifnum`#1=`##2\noexpand\@empty
                 \else\noexpand##1\noexpand##2\fi}%
    \def\do{\x\do}%
    \def\@makeother{\x\@makeother}%
  \edef\x{\endgroup
    \def\noexpand\dospecials{\dospecials}%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname @sanitize\endcsname\relax\else
      \def\noexpand\@sanitize{\@sanitize}%
    \fi}%
  \x}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\initiate@active@char}
%    A language definition file can call this macro to make a
%    character active. This macro takes one argument, the character
%    that is to be made active. When the character was already active
%    this macro does nothing. Otherwise, this macro defines the
%    control sequence |\normal@char|\m{char} to expand to the
%    character in its `normal state' and it defines the active
%    character to expand to |\normal@char|\m{char} by default
%    (\m{char} being the character to be made active). Later its
%    definition can be changed to expand to |\active@char|\m{char}
%    by calling |\bbl@activate{|\m{char}|}|.
%
%    For example, to make the double quote character active one could
%    have |\initiate@active@char{"}| in a language definition file.
%    This defines |"| as |\active@prefix "\active@char"| (where the
%    first |"| is the character with its original catcode, when the
%    shorthand is created, and |\active@char"| is a single token). In
%    protected contexts, it expands to |\protect "| or |\noexpand "|
%    (ie, with the original |"|); otherwise |\active@char"| is
%    executed. This macro in turn expands to |\normal@char"| in
%    ``safe'' contexts (eg, |\label|), but |\user@active"| in normal
%    ``unsafe'' ones. The latter search a definition in the user,
%    language and system levels, in this order, but if none is found,
%    |\normal@char"| is used.  However, a deactivated shorthand (with
%    |\bbl@deactivate| is defined as |\active@prefix "\normal@char"|.
%
%    The following macro is used to define shorthands in the three
%    levels. It takes 4 arguments: the (string'ed) character,
%    |\<level>@group|, |<level>@active| and |<next-level>@active|
%    (except in |system|).
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/18}{New macro, with code from
%    \cs{@initiate@active@char}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@active@def#1#2#3#4{%
  \@namedef{#3#1}{%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname#2@sh@#1@\endcsname\relax
      \bbl@afterelse\bbl@sh@select#2#1{#3@arg#1}{#4#1}%
    \else
      \bbl@afterfi\csname#2@sh@#1@\endcsname
    \fi}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When there is also no current-level shorthand with an argument we
%    will check whether there is a next-level  defined shorthand for
%    this active character.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \long\@namedef{#3@arg#1}##1{%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname#2@sh@#1@\string##1@\endcsname\relax
      \bbl@afterelse\csname#4#1\endcsname##1%
    \else
      \bbl@afterfi\csname#2@sh@#1@\string##1@\endcsname
    \fi}}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/18}{Removed an extra hash. Now calls
%    \cs{@initiate@active@char} with 3 arguments.}
%
%    |\initiate@active@char| calls |\@initiate@active@char| with 3
%    arguments. All of them are the same character with different
%    catcodes: active, other (|\string|'ed) and the original one.
%    This trick simplifies the code a lot.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\initiate@active@char#1{%
  \bbl@ifunset{active@char\string#1}%
    {\bbl@withactive
      {\expandafter\@initiate@active@char\expandafter}#1\string#1#1}%
    {}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9e}{2012/08/18}{Introduced the 3-argument
%   \cs{@initiate@active@char}, with different catcodes: active,
%   string'ed, and original. Reorganized}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/19}{The catcode is saved}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/09}{The original definition is saved,
% too}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/27}{Take into account mathematically
%   active chars, to avoid infinite loops}
%
%   The very first thing to do is saving the original catcode and the
%   original definition, even if not active, which is possible
%   (undefined characters require a special treatement to avoid
%   making them |\relax|).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\@initiate@active@char#1#2#3{%
  \bbl@csarg\edef{oricat@#2}{\catcode`#2=\the\catcode`#2\relax}%
  \ifx#1\@undefined
    \bbl@csarg\edef{oridef@#2}{\let\noexpand#1\noexpand\@undefined}%
  \else
    \bbl@csarg\let{oridef@@#2}#1%
    \bbl@csarg\edef{oridef@#2}{%
      \let\noexpand#1%
      \expandafter\noexpand\csname bbl@oridef@@#2\endcsname}%
  \fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    If the character is already active we provide the default
%    expansion under this shorthand mechanism. Otherwise we write a
%    message in the transcript file, and define |\normal@char|\m{char}
%    to expand to the character in its default state. If the character
%    is mathematically active when \babel{} is loaded (for example
%    |'|) the normal expansion is somewhat different to avoid an
%    infinite loop (but it does not prevent the loop if the mathcode
%    is set to |"8000| \textit{a posteriori}).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \ifx#1#3\relax
    \expandafter\let\csname normal@char#2\endcsname#3%
  \else
    \bbl@info{Making #2 an active character}%
    \ifnum\mathcode`#2="8000
      \@namedef{normal@char#2}{%
        \textormath{#3}{\csname bbl@oridef@@#2\endcsname}}%
    \else
      \@namedef{normal@char#2}{#3}%
    \fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    To prevent problems with the loading of other packages after
%    \babel\ we reset the catcode of the character to the original one
%    at the end of the package and of each language file (except with
%    \textsf{KeepShorthandsActive}). It is re-activate again at
%    |\begin{document}|.  We also need to make sure that the
%    shorthands are active during the processing of the \file{.aux}
%    file. Otherwise some citations may give unexpected results in
%    the printout when a shorthand was used in the optional argument
%    of |\bibitem| for example. Then we make it active (not strictly
%    necessary, but done for backward compatibility).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \bbl@restoreactive{#2}%
    \AtBeginDocument{%
      \catcode`#2\active
      \if@filesw
        \immediate\write\@mainaux{\catcode`\string#2\active}%
      \fi}%
    \expandafter\bbl@add@special\csname#2\endcsname
    \catcode`#2\active
  \fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now we have set |\normal@char|\m{char}, we must define
%    |\active@char|\m{char}, to be executed when the character is
%    activated.  We define the first level expansion of
%    |\active@char|\m{char} to check the status of the |@safe@actives|
%    flag. If it is set to true we expand to the `normal' version of
%    this character, otherwise we call |\user@active|\m{char} to start
%    the search of a definition in the user, language and system
%    levels (or eventually |normal@char|\m{char}).
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/27}{Added code for option math=normal}
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/02/03}{Don't call directly
%    \cs{user@active}, but with an intermediate step}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \let\bbl@tempa\@firstoftwo
  \if\string^#2%
    \def\bbl@tempa{\noexpand\textormath}%
  \else
    \ifx\bbl@mathnormal\@undefined\else
      \let\bbl@tempa\bbl@mathnormal
    \fi
  \fi
  \expandafter\edef\csname active@char#2\endcsname{%
    \bbl@tempa
      {\noexpand\if@safe@actives
         \noexpand\expandafter
         \expandafter\noexpand\csname normal@char#2\endcsname
       \noexpand\else
         \noexpand\expandafter
         \expandafter\noexpand\csname bbl@doactive#2\endcsname
       \noexpand\fi}%
     {\expandafter\noexpand\csname normal@char#2\endcsname}}%
  \bbl@csarg\edef{doactive#2}{%
    \expandafter\noexpand\csname user@active#2\endcsname}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/27}{Shorthands are not defined
%    directly, but with a couple of intermediate macros}
%
%    We now define the default values which the shorthand is set to
%    when activated or deactivated. It is set to the deactivated form
%    (globally), so that the character expands to
%    \begin{center}
%    |\active@prefix| \m{char} |\normal@char|\m{char}
%    \end{center}
%    (where |\active@char|\m{char} is \emph{one} control sequence!).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@csarg\edef{active@#2}{%
    \noexpand\active@prefix\noexpand#1%
    \expandafter\noexpand\csname active@char#2\endcsname}%
  \bbl@csarg\edef{normal@#2}{%
    \noexpand\active@prefix\noexpand#1%
    \expandafter\noexpand\csname normal@char#2\endcsname}%
  \expandafter\let\expandafter#1\csname bbl@normal@#2\endcsname
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The next level of the code checks whether a user has defined a
%    shorthand for himself with this character. First we check for a
%    single character shorthand. If that doesn't exist we check for a
%    shorthand with an argument.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/04/19}{Now use \cs{bbl@sh@select}}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/18}{Instead of the ``copy-paste pattern''
% a new macro is used}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@active@def#2\user@group{user@active}{language@active}%
  \bbl@active@def#2\language@group{language@active}{system@active}%
  \bbl@active@def#2\system@group{system@active}{normal@char}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    In order to do the right thing when a shorthand with an argument
%    is used by itself at the end of the line we provide a definition
%    for the case of an empty argument. For that case we let the
%    shorthand character expand to its non-active self. Also, When a
%    shorthand combination such as |''| ends up in a heading \TeX\
%    would see |\protect'\protect'|. To prevent this from happening a
%    couple of shorthand needs to be defined at user level.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/8/18}{Use \cs{user@group}, as above,
%    instead of the hardwired \texttt{user}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \expandafter\edef\csname\user@group @sh@#2@@\endcsname
    {\expandafter\noexpand\csname normal@char#2\endcsname}%
  \expandafter\edef\csname\user@group @sh@#2@\string\protect@\endcsname
    {\expandafter\noexpand\csname user@active#2\endcsname}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Finally, a couple of special cases are taken care of.  (1) If we
%    are making the right quote (|'|) active we need to change |\pr@m@s| as
%    well.  Also, make sure that a single |'| in math mode `does the
%    right thing'.  (2) If we are using the caret (|^|) as a shorthand
%    character special care should be taken to make sure math still
%    works. Therefore an extra level of expansion is introduced with a
%    check for math mode on the upper level.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/11}{The output routine resets the quote
%   to \cs{active@math@prime}, so we redefine the latter with the new
%  ``normal'' value}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/20}{Added a couple of missing
%    comment characters (PR 4146)}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/29}{Use \cs{textormath} instead of
%    \cs{ifmath}}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/11/26}{Compare the char, irrespective of
%    its catcode.}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/27}{Removed the redeclaration of
%   \cs{normal@char'} because it is handled in a generic way above}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/29}{Removed the intermediate step of
%   \cs{bbl@act@caret} and moved above}
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2012/12/29}{Added the event \cs{initiateactive}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \if\string'#2%
    \let\prim@s\bbl@prim@s
    \let\active@math@prime#1%
  \fi
  \bbl@usehooks{initiateactive}{{#1}{#2}{#3}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following package options control the behavior of shorthands
%    in math mode.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*More package options>>
\DeclareOption{math=active}{}
\DeclareOption{math=normal}{\def\bbl@mathnormal{\noexpand\textormath}}
%<</More package options>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Initiating a shorthand makes active the char. That is not
%    strictly necessary but it is still done for backward
%    compatibility. So we need to restore the original catcode at the
%    end of package \textit{and} and the end of the |ldf|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/04}{Catcodes are also restored after
%    each language, to prevent incompatibilities. Use \cs{string} instead
%    of \cs{noexpand} and add \cs{relax}}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/10/18}{Catcodes are deactivated in a separate
%    macro, which is made no-op when babel exits}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@ifpackagewith{babel}{KeepShorthandsActive}%
  {\let\bbl@restoreactive\@gobble}%
  {\def\bbl@restoreactive#1{%
     \bbl@exp{%
       \\\AfterBabelLanguage\\\CurrentOption
         {\catcode`#1=\the\catcode`#1\relax}%
       \\\AtEndOfPackage
         {\catcode`#1=\the\catcode`#1\relax}}}%
   \AtEndOfPackage{\let\bbl@restoreactive\@gobble}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@sh@select}
%    This command helps the shorthand supporting macros to select how
%    to proceed. Note that this macro needs to be expandable as do all
%    the shorthand macros in order for them to work in expansion-only
%    environments such as the argument of |\hyphenation|.
%
%    This macro expects the name of a group of shorthands in its first
%    argument and a shorthand character in its second argument. It
%    will expand to either |\bbl@firstcs| or |\bbl@scndcs|. Hence two
%    more arguments need to follow it.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/04/19}{Added command}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/18}{Removed \cs{string}s, because the
%   char are already string'ed}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@sh@select#1#2{%
  \expandafter\ifx\csname#1@sh@#2@sel\endcsname\relax
    \bbl@afterelse\bbl@scndcs
  \else
    \bbl@afterfi\csname#1@sh@#2@sel\endcsname
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\active@prefix}
%    The command |\active@prefix| which is used in the expansion of
%    active characters has a function similar to |\OT1-cmd| in that it
%    |\protect|s the active character whenever |\protect| is
%    \emph{not} |\@typeset@protect|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\active@prefix#1{%
  \ifx\protect\@typeset@protect
  \else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When |\protect| is set to |\@unexpandable@protect| we make sure
%    that the active character is als \emph{not} expanded by inserting
%    |\noexpand| in front of it. The |\@gobble| is needed to remove
%    a token such as |\activechar:| (when the double colon was the
%    active character to be dealt with).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \ifx\protect\@unexpandable@protect
      \noexpand#1%
    \else
      \protect#1%
    \fi
    \expandafter\@gobble
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\if@safe@actives}
%    In some circumstances it is necessary to be able to change the
%    expansion of an active character on the fly. For this purpose the
%    switch |@safe@actives| is available. The setting of this switch
%    should be checked in the first level expansion of
%    |\active@char|\m{char}.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newif\if@safe@actives
\@safe@activesfalse
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@restore@actives}
%    When the output routine kicks in while the
%    active characters were made ``safe'' this must be undone in
%    the headers to prevent unexpected typeset results. For this
%    situation we define a command to make them ``unsafe'' again.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@restore@actives{\if@safe@actives\@safe@activesfalse\fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@activate}
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@deactivate}
%
%  \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/01/11}{\cs{bbl@withactive} makes sure the
%    catcode is active}
%
%    Both macros take one argument, like |\initiate@active@char|. The
%    macro is used to change the definition of an active character to
%    expand to |\active@char|\m{char} in the case of |\bbl@activate|,
%    or |\normal@char|\m{char} in the case of
%    |\bbl@deactivate|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@activate#1{%
  \bbl@withactive{\expandafter\let\expandafter}#1%
    \csname bbl@active@\string#1\endcsname}
\def\bbl@deactivate#1{%
  \bbl@withactive{\expandafter\let\expandafter}#1%
    \csname bbl@normal@\string#1\endcsname}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@firstcs}
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@scndcs}
%    These macros have two arguments. They use one of their arguments
%    to build a control sequence from.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@firstcs#1#2{\csname#1\endcsname}
\def\bbl@scndcs#1#2{\csname#2\endcsname}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\declare@shorthand}
%    The command |\declare@shorthand| is used to declare a shorthand
%    on a certain level. It takes three arguments:
%    \begin{enumerate}
%    \item a name for the collection of shorthands, i.e. `system', or
%      `dutch';
%    \item the character (sequence) that makes up the shorthand,
%      i.e. |~| or |"a|;
%    \item the code to be executed when the shorthand is encountered.
%    \end{enumerate}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/04/19}{We need to support shorthands with
%    and without argument in different groups; added the name of the
%    group to the storage macro}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/03}{Check if shorthands are redefined}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\declare@shorthand#1#2{\@decl@short{#1}#2\@nil}
\def\@decl@short#1#2#3\@nil#4{%
  \def\bbl@tempa{#3}%
  \ifx\bbl@tempa\@empty
    \expandafter\let\csname #1@sh@\string#2@sel\endcsname\bbl@scndcs
    \bbl@ifunset{#1@sh@\string#2@}{}%
      {\def\bbl@tempa{#4}%
       \expandafter\ifx\csname#1@sh@\string#2@\endcsname\bbl@tempa
       \else
         \bbl@info
           {Redefining #1 shorthand \string#2\\%
            in language \CurrentOption}%
       \fi}%
    \@namedef{#1@sh@\string#2@}{#4}%
  \else
    \expandafter\let\csname #1@sh@\string#2@sel\endcsname\bbl@firstcs
    \bbl@ifunset{#1@sh@\string#2@\string#3@}{}%
      {\def\bbl@tempa{#4}%
       \expandafter\ifx\csname#1@sh@\string#2@\string#3@\endcsname\bbl@tempa
       \else
         \bbl@info
           {Redefining #1 shorthand \string#2\string#3\\%
            in language \CurrentOption}%
       \fi}%
    \@namedef{#1@sh@\string#2@\string#3@}{#4}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\textormath}
%    Some of the shorthands that will be declared by the language
%    definition files have to be usable in both text and mathmode. To
%    achieve this the helper macro |\textormath| is provided.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/29}{Failed if an argument had a
%    condicional. Use the more robust mechanism of \cs{XXXoftwo}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\textormath{%
  \ifmmode
    \expandafter\@secondoftwo
  \else
    \expandafter\@firstoftwo
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\user@group}
%  \begin{macro}{\language@group}
%  \begin{macro}{\system@group}
%    The current concept of `shorthands' supports three levels or
%    groups of shorthands. For each level the name of the level or
%    group is stored in a macro. The default is to have a user group;
%    use language group `english' and have a system group called
%    `system'.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\user@group{user}
\def\language@group{english}
\def\system@group{system}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\useshorthands}
%    This is the user level command to tell \LaTeX\ that user level
%    shorthands will be used in the document. It takes one argument,
%    the character that starts a shorthand. First note that this is
%    user level, and then initialize and activate the character for
%    use as a shorthand character (ie, it's active in the
%    preamble). Languages can deactivate shorthands, so a starred
%    version is also provided which activates them always after the
%    language has been switched.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/05}{Now \cs{bbl@activate} makes sure
%    the catcode is active, so this part is simplified}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/12}{User shorhands can be
%   defined even with shorthands=off}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\useshorthands{%
  \@ifstar\bbl@usesh@s{\bbl@usesh@x{}}}
\def\bbl@usesh@s#1{%
  \bbl@usesh@x
    {\AddBabelHook{babel-sh-\string#1}{afterextras}{\bbl@activate{#1}}}%
    {#1}}
\def\bbl@usesh@x#1#2{%
  \bbl@ifshorthand{#2}%
    {\def\user@group{user}%
     \initiate@active@char{#2}%
     #1%
     \bbl@activate{#2}}%
    {\bbl@error
       {Cannot declare a shorthand turned off (\string#2)}
       {Sorry, but you cannot use shorthands which have been\\%
        turned off in the package options}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\defineshorthand}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/05}{Added optional argument, to provide
%    a way to (re)define language shorthands}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/25}{Extended for language-dependent
%    user macros, with two new auxiliary macros}
%
%    Currently we only support two groups of user level shorthands,
%    named internally |user| and |user@<lang>| (language-dependent
%    user shorthands). By default, only the first one is taken into
%    account, but if the former is also used (in the optional argument
%    of |\defineshorthand|) a new level is inserted for it
%    (|user@generic|, done by |\bbl@set@user@generic|); we make also
%    sure |{}| and |\protect| are taken into account in this new top
%    level.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\user@language@group{user@\language@group}
\def\bbl@set@user@generic#1#2{%
  \bbl@ifunset{user@generic@active#1}%
    {\bbl@active@def#1\user@language@group{user@active}{user@generic@active}%
     \bbl@active@def#1\user@group{user@generic@active}{language@active}%
     \expandafter\edef\csname#2@sh@#1@@\endcsname{%
       \expandafter\noexpand\csname normal@char#1\endcsname}%
     \expandafter\edef\csname#2@sh@#1@\string\protect@\endcsname{%
       \expandafter\noexpand\csname user@active#1\endcsname}}%
  \@empty}
\newcommand\defineshorthand[3][user]{%
  \edef\bbl@tempa{\zap@space#1 \@empty}%
  \bbl@for\bbl@tempb\bbl@tempa{%
    \if*\expandafter\@car\bbl@tempb\@nil
      \edef\bbl@tempb{user@\expandafter\@gobble\bbl@tempb}%
      \@expandtwoargs
        \bbl@set@user@generic{\expandafter\string\@car#2\@nil}\bbl@tempb
    \fi
    \declare@shorthand{\bbl@tempb}{#2}{#3}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\languageshorthands}
%    A user level command to change the language from which shorthands
%    are used. Unfortunately, \babel{} currently does not keep track
%    of defined groups, and therefore there is no way to catch a
%    possible change in casing.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\languageshorthands#1{\def\language@group{#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\aliasshorthand}
%    First the new shorthand needs to be initialized,
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\aliasshorthand#1#2{%
  \bbl@ifshorthand{#2}%
    {\expandafter\ifx\csname active@char\string#2\endcsname\relax
       \ifx\document\@notprerr
         \@notshorthand{#2}%
       \else
         \initiate@active@char{#2}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/06}{Instead of letting the new shorthand to
%    the original char, which very often didn't work, we define it
%    directly}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/20}{Make sure both characters (old an
%    new) are active}
%
%    Then, we define the new shorthand in terms of the original
%    one, but note with |\aliasshorthands{"}{/}| is
%    |\active@prefix /\active@char/|, so we still need to let the
%    lattest to |\active@char"|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
         \expandafter\let\csname active@char\string#2\expandafter\endcsname
           \csname active@char\string#1\endcsname
         \expandafter\let\csname normal@char\string#2\expandafter\endcsname
           \csname normal@char\string#1\endcsname
         \bbl@activate{#2}%
       \fi
     \fi}%
    {\bbl@error
       {Cannot declare a shorthand turned off (\string#2)}
       {Sorry, but you cannot use shorthands which have been\\%
        turned off in the package options}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\@notshorthand}
%
% \changes{v3.8d}{2004/11/20}{Error message added}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\@notshorthand#1{%
  \bbl@error{%
    The character `\string #1' should be made a shorthand character;\\%
    add the command \string\useshorthands\string{#1\string} to
    the preamble.\\%
    I will ignore your instruction}%
   {You may proceed, but expect unexpected results}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\shorthandon}
%  \begin{macro}{\shorthandoff}
%    The first level definition of these macros just passes the
%    argument on to |\bbl@switch@sh|, adding |\@nil| at the end to
%    denote the end of the list of characters.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newcommand*\shorthandon[1]{\bbl@switch@sh\@ne#1\@nnil}
\DeclareRobustCommand*\shorthandoff{%
  \@ifstar{\bbl@shorthandoff\tw@}{\bbl@shorthandoff\z@}}
\def\bbl@shorthandoff#1#2{\bbl@switch@sh#1#2\@nnil}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@switch@sh}
%
%   \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/02/21}{Code revised}
%
%    The macro |\bbl@switch@sh| takes the list of characters apart one
%    by  one and subsequently switches the category code of the
%    shorthand character according to the first argument of
%    |\bbl@switch@sh|.
%
%    But before any of this switching takes place we make sure that
%    the character we are dealing with is known as a shorthand
%    character. If it is, a macro such as |\active@char"| should
%    exist.
%
%    Switching off and on is easy -- we just set the category
%    code to `other' (12) and |\active|. With the starred version, the
%    original catcode and the original definition, saved
%    in |@initiate@active@char|, are restored.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@switch@sh#1#2{%
  \ifx#2\@nnil\else
    \bbl@ifunset{bbl@active@\string#2}%
      {\bbl@error
         {I cannot switch `\string#2' on or off--not a shorthand}%
         {This character is not a shorthand. Maybe you made\\%
          a typing mistake? I will ignore your instruction}}%
      {\ifcase#1%
         \catcode`#212\relax
       \or
         \catcode`#2\active
       \or
         \csname bbl@oricat@\string#2\endcsname
         \csname bbl@oridef@\string#2\endcsname
       \fi}%
    \bbl@afterfi\bbl@switch@sh#1%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/16}{Added code}
%
% Note the value is that at the expansion time, eg, in the preample
% shorhands are usually deactivated.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\babelshorthand{\active@prefix\babelshorthand\bbl@putsh}
\def\bbl@putsh#1{%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@active@\string#1}%
     {\bbl@putsh@i#1\@empty\@nnil}%
     {\csname bbl@active@\string#1\endcsname}}
\def\bbl@putsh@i#1#2\@nnil{%
  \csname\languagename @sh@\string#1@%
    \ifx\@empty#2\else\string#2@\fi\endcsname}
\ifx\bbl@opt@shorthands\@nnil\else
  \let\bbl@s@initiate@active@char\initiate@active@char
  \def\initiate@active@char#1{%
    \bbl@ifshorthand{#1}{\bbl@s@initiate@active@char{#1}}{}}
  \let\bbl@s@switch@sh\bbl@switch@sh
  \def\bbl@switch@sh#1#2{%
    \ifx#2\@nnil\else
      \bbl@afterfi
      \bbl@ifshorthand{#2}{\bbl@s@switch@sh#1{#2}}{\bbl@switch@sh#1}%
    \fi}
  \let\bbl@s@activate\bbl@activate
  \def\bbl@activate#1{%
    \bbl@ifshorthand{#1}{\bbl@s@activate{#1}}{}}
  \let\bbl@s@deactivate\bbl@deactivate
  \def\bbl@deactivate#1{%
    \bbl@ifshorthand{#1}{\bbl@s@deactivate{#1}}{}}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/27}{Removed redundant system declarations}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@prim@s}
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@pr@m@s}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/29}{\cs{bbl@pr@m@s} rewritten to
%    take into account catcodes for both the quote and the hat}
%
%    One of the internal macros that are involved in substituting
%    |\prime| for each right quote in mathmode is |\prim@s|. This
%    checks if the next character is a right quote. When the right
%    quote is active, the definition of this macro needs to be adapted
%    to look also for an active right quote; the hat could be active,
%    too.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@prim@s{%
  \prime\futurelet\@let@token\bbl@pr@m@s}
\def\bbl@if@primes#1#2{%
  \ifx#1\@let@token
    \expandafter\@firstoftwo
  \else\ifx#2\@let@token
    \bbl@afterelse\expandafter\@firstoftwo
  \else
    \bbl@afterfi\expandafter\@secondoftwo
  \fi\fi}
\begingroup
  \catcode`\^=7  \catcode`\*=\active  \lccode`\*=`\^
  \catcode`\'=12 \catcode`\"=\active  \lccode`\"=`\'
  \lowercase{%
    \gdef\bbl@pr@m@s{%
      \bbl@if@primes"'%
        \pr@@@s
        {\bbl@if@primes*^\pr@@@t\egroup}}}
\endgroup
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%    Usually the |~| is active and expands to \verb*=\penalty\@M\ =.
%    When it is written to the \file{.aux} file it is written
%    expanded. To prevent that and to be able to use the character |~|
%    as a start character for a shorthand, it is redefined here as a
%    one character shorthand on system level. The system declaration
%    is in most cases redundant (when |~| is still a non-break space),
%    and in some cases is inconvenient (if |~| has been redefined);
%    however, for backward compatibility it is maintained (some
%    existing documents may rely on the \babel{} value).
%
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/02/06}{Moved from above, after
%    \cs{bbl@usehook} has been defined}
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/02/06}{Moved again at the original place}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\initiate@active@char{~}
\declare@shorthand{system}{~}{\leavevmode\nobreak\ }
\bbl@activate{~}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\OT1dqpos}
%  \begin{macro}{\T1dqpos}
%    The position of the double quote character is different for the
%    OT1 and T1 encodings. It will later be selected using the
%    |\f@encoding| macro. Therefore we define two macros here to store
%    the position of the character in these encodings.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\expandafter\def\csname OT1dqpos\endcsname{127}
\expandafter\def\csname T1dqpos\endcsname{4}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When the macro |\f@encoding| is undefined (as it is in plain
%    \TeX) we define it here to expand to \texttt{OT1}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\f@encoding\@undefined
  \def\f@encoding{OT1}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Language attributes}
%
%    Language attributes provide a means to give the user control over
%    which features of the language definition files he wants to
%    enable.
%  \begin{macro}{\languageattribute}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/07}{Use \cs{@expandtwoargs} with
%   \cs{in@}}
%
%    The macro |\languageattribute| checks whether its arguments are
%    valid and then activates the selected language attribute.
%    First check whether the language is known, and then process each
%    attribute in the list.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Language attributes}
\newcommand\languageattribute[2]{%
  \def\bbl@tempc{#1}%
  \bbl@fixname\bbl@tempc
  \bbl@iflanguage\bbl@tempc{%
    \bbl@vforeach{#2}{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We want to make sure that each attribute is selected only once;
%    therefore we store the already selected attributes in
%    |\bbl@known@attribs|. When that control sequence is not yet
%    defined this attribute is certainly not selected before.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      \ifx\bbl@known@attribs\@undefined
        \in@false
      \else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now we need to see if the attribute occurs in the list of
%    already selected attributes.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
        \bbl@xin@{,\bbl@tempc-##1,}{,\bbl@known@attribs,}%
      \fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When the attribute was in the list we issue a warning; this might
%    not be the users intention.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      \ifin@
        \bbl@warning{%
          You have more than once selected the attribute '##1'\\%
          for language #1. Reported}%
      \else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When we end up here the attribute is not selected before. So, we
%    add it to the list of selected attributes and execute the
%    associated \TeX-code.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
        \bbl@exp{%
          \\\bbl@add@list\\\bbl@known@attribs{\bbl@tempc-##1}}%
        \edef\bbl@tempa{\bbl@tempc-##1}%
        \expandafter\bbl@ifknown@ttrib\expandafter{\bbl@tempa}\bbl@attributes%
        {\csname\bbl@tempc @attr@##1\endcsname}%
        {\@attrerr{\bbl@tempc}{##1}}%
     \fi}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    This command should only be used in the preamble of a document.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@onlypreamble\languageattribute
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The error text to be issued when an unknown attribute is
%    selected.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newcommand*{\@attrerr}[2]{%
  \bbl@error
    {The attribute #2 is unknown for language #1.}%
    {Your command will be ignored, type <return> to proceed}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@declare@ttribute}
%    This command adds the new language/attribute combination to the
%    list of known attributes.
%
%    Then it defines a control sequence to be executed when the
%    attribute is used in a document. The result of this should be
%    that the macro |\extras...| for the current language is extended,
%    otherwise the attribute will not work as its code is removed from
%    memory at |\begin{document}|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@declare@ttribute#1#2#3{%
  \bbl@xin@{,#2,}{,\BabelModifiers,}%
  \ifin@
    \AfterBabelLanguage{#1}{\languageattribute{#1}{#2}}%
  \fi
  \bbl@add@list\bbl@attributes{#1-#2}%
  \expandafter\def\csname#1@attr@#2\endcsname{#3}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@ifattributeset}
%    This internal macro has 4 arguments. It can be used to interpret
%    \TeX\ code based on whether a certain attribute was set. This
%    command should appear inside the argument to |\AtBeginDocument|
%    because the attributes are set in the document preamble,
%    \emph{after} \babel\ is loaded.
%
%    The first argument is the language, the second argument the
%    attribute being checked, and the third and fourth arguments are
%    the true and false clauses.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@ifattributeset#1#2#3#4{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    First we need to find out if any attributes were set; if not
%    we're done.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \ifx\bbl@known@attribs\@undefined
    \in@false
  \else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The we need to check the list of known attributes.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \bbl@xin@{,#1-#2,}{,\bbl@known@attribs,}%
  \fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When we're this far |\ifin@| has a value indicating if the
%    attribute in question was set or not. Just to be safe the code to
%    be executed is `thrown over the |\fi|'.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \ifin@
    \bbl@afterelse#3%
  \else
    \bbl@afterfi#4%
  \fi
  }
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@ifknown@ttrib}
%    An internal macro to check whether a given language/attribute is
%    known. The macro takes 4 arguments, the language/attribute, the
%    attribute list, the \TeX-code to be executed when the attribute
%    is known and the \TeX-code to be executed otherwise.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@ifknown@ttrib#1#2{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We first assume the attribute is unknown.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \let\bbl@tempa\@secondoftwo
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then we loop over the list of known attributes, trying to find a
%    match.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@loopx\bbl@tempb{#2}{%
    \expandafter\in@\expandafter{\expandafter,\bbl@tempb,}{,#1,}%
    \ifin@
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When a match is found the definition of |\bbl@tempa| is changed.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      \let\bbl@tempa\@firstoftwo
    \else
    \fi}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Finally we execute |\bbl@tempa|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@tempa
}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@clear@ttribs}
%    This macro removes all the attribute code from \LaTeX's memory at
%    |\begin{document}| time (if any is present).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@clear@ttribs{%
  \ifx\bbl@attributes\@undefined\else
    \bbl@loopx\bbl@tempa{\bbl@attributes}{%
      \expandafter\bbl@clear@ttrib\bbl@tempa.
      }%
    \let\bbl@attributes\@undefined
  \fi}
\def\bbl@clear@ttrib#1-#2.{%
  \expandafter\let\csname#1@attr@#2\endcsname\@undefined}
\AtBeginDocument{\bbl@clear@ttribs}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Support for saving macro definitions}
%
%  To save the meaning of control sequences using |\babel@save|, we
%  use temporary control sequences.  To save hash table entries for
%  these control sequences, we don't use the name of the control
%  sequence to be saved to construct the temporary name.  Instead we
%  simply use the value of a counter, which is reset to zero each time
%  we begin to save new values.  This works well because we release
%  the saved meanings before we begin to save a new set of control
%  sequence meanings (see |\selectlanguage| and |\originalTeX|). Note
%  undefined macros are not undefined any more when saved -- they are
%  |\relax|'ed.
%
%  \begin{macro}{\babel@savecnt}
%  \begin{macro}{\babel@beginsave}
%    The initialization of a new save cycle: reset the counter to
%    zero.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Macros for saving definitions}
\def\babel@beginsave{\babel@savecnt\z@}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Before it's forgotten, allocate the counter and initialize all.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newcount\babel@savecnt
\babel@beginsave
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\babel@save}
%    The macro |\babel@save|\meta{csname} saves the current meaning of
%    the control sequence \meta{csname} to
%    |\originalTeX|\footnote{\cs{originalTeX} has to be
%    expandable, i.\,e.\ you shouldn't let it to \cs{relax}.}.
%    To do this, we let the current meaning to a temporary control
%    sequence, the restore commands are appended to |\originalTeX| and
%    the counter is incremented.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\babel@save#1{%
  \expandafter\let\csname babel@\number\babel@savecnt\endcsname#1\relax
  \toks@\expandafter{\originalTeX\let#1=}%
  \bbl@exp{%
    \def\\\originalTeX{\the\toks@\<babel@\number\babel@savecnt>\relax}}%
  \advance\babel@savecnt\@ne}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\babel@savevariable}
%
%    The macro |\babel@savevariable|\meta{variable} saves the value of
%    the variable.  \meta{variable} can be anything allowed after the
%    |\the| primitive.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\babel@savevariable#1{%
  \toks@\expandafter{\originalTeX #1=}%
  \bbl@exp{\def\\\originalTeX{\the\toks@\the#1\relax}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@frenchspacing}
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@nonfrenchspacing}
%    Some languages need to have |\frenchspacing| in effect. Others
%    don't want that. The command |\bbl@frenchspacing| switches it on
%    when it isn't already in effect and |\bbl@nonfrenchspacing|
%    switches it off if necessary.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@frenchspacing{%
  \ifnum\the\sfcode`\.=\@m
    \let\bbl@nonfrenchspacing\relax
  \else
    \frenchspacing
    \let\bbl@nonfrenchspacing\nonfrenchspacing
  \fi}
\let\bbl@nonfrenchspacing\nonfrenchspacing
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Short tags}
%
% \begin{macro}{\babeltags}
% This macro is straightforward. After zapping spaces, we
% loop over the list and define the macros |\text|\m{tag} and
% |\|\m{tag}. Definitions are first expanded so that they don't
% contain |\csname| but the actual macro.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/02/21}{Macro \cs{babeltags} added}
%
%   \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Short tags}
\def\babeltags#1{%
  \edef\bbl@tempa{\zap@space#1 \@empty}%
  \def\bbl@tempb##1=##2\@@{%
    \edef\bbl@tempc{%
      \noexpand\newcommand
      \expandafter\noexpand\csname ##1\endcsname{%
        \noexpand\protect
        \expandafter\noexpand\csname otherlanguage*\endcsname{##2}}
      \noexpand\newcommand
      \expandafter\noexpand\csname text##1\endcsname{%
        \noexpand\foreignlanguage{##2}}}
    \bbl@tempc}%
  \bbl@for\bbl@tempa\bbl@tempa{%
    \expandafter\bbl@tempb\bbl@tempa\@@}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Hyphens}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\babelhyphenation}
%
%     This macro saves hyphenation exceptions. Two macros are used to
%     store them: |\bbl@hyphenation@| for the global ones and
%     |\bbl@hyphenation<lang>| for language ones. See |\bbl@patterns|
%     above for further details. We make sure there is a space between
%     words when multiple commands are used.
%
%     \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/28}{Macro added}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Hyphens}
\@onlypreamble\babelhyphenation
\AtEndOfPackage{%
  \newcommand\babelhyphenation[2][\@empty]{%
    \ifx\bbl@hyphenation@\relax
      \let\bbl@hyphenation@\@empty
    \fi
    \ifx\bbl@hyphlist\@empty\else
      \bbl@warning{%
        You must not intermingle \string\selectlanguage\space and\\%
        \string\babelhyphenation\space or some exceptions will not\\%
        be taken into account. Reported}%
    \fi
    \ifx\@empty#1%
      \protected@edef\bbl@hyphenation@{\bbl@hyphenation@\space#2}%
    \else
      \bbl@vforeach{#1}{%
        \def\bbl@tempa{##1}%
        \bbl@fixname\bbl@tempa
        \bbl@iflanguage\bbl@tempa{%
          \bbl@csarg\protected@edef{hyphenation@\bbl@tempa}{%
            \bbl@ifunset{bbl@hyphenation@\bbl@tempa}%
              \@empty
              {\csname bbl@hyphenation@\bbl@tempa\endcsname\space}%
            #2}}}%
    \fi}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@allowhyphens}
%
% \changes{babel-3.9a}{2012/07/28}{Replaced many \cs{allowhyphens} by
%    \cs{bbl@allowhyphen}. They were either no-op or executed always.}
% \changes{babel-3.9i}{2014/01/29}{\cs{bbl@allowhyphens} must be
%    ignored at the beginning of a paragraph or table cell.}
% \changes{babel-3.9t}{2017/04/26}{Fixed misplaced \cs{nobreak} -
%    sx366454 - soft hyphens could vanish.}
%
%    This macro makes hyphenation possible. Basically its definition
%    is nothing more than |\nobreak| |\hskip| \texttt{0pt plus
%    0pt}\footnote{\TeX\ begins and ends a word for hyphenation at a
%    glue node. The penalty prevents a linebreak at this glue node.}.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@allowhyphens{\ifvmode\else\nobreak\hskip\z@skip\fi}
\def\bbl@t@one{T1}
\def\allowhyphens{\ifx\cf@encoding\bbl@t@one\else\bbl@allowhyphens\fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \changes{babel-3.9a}{2012/08/27}{Added \cs{babelhyphen} and related
%    macros}
%
% \begin{macro}{\babelhyphen}
%
%    Macros to insert common hyphens. Note the space before |@| in
%    |\babelhyphen|. Instead of protecting it with
%    |\DeclareRobustCommand|, which could insert a |\relax|, we use
%    the same procedure as shorthands, with |\active@prefix|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newcommand\babelnullhyphen{\char\hyphenchar\font}
\def\babelhyphen{\active@prefix\babelhyphen\bbl@hyphen}
\def\bbl@hyphen{%
  \@ifstar{\bbl@hyphen@i @}{\bbl@hyphen@i\@empty}}
\def\bbl@hyphen@i#1#2{%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@hy@#1#2\@empty}%
    {\csname bbl@#1usehyphen\endcsname{\discretionary{#2}{}{#2}}}%
    {\csname bbl@hy@#1#2\@empty\endcsname}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following two commands are used to wrap the ``hyphen'' and
%    set the behavior of the rest of the word -- the version with a
%    single |@| is used when further hyphenation is allowed, while
%    that with |@@| if no more hyphen are allowed. In both cases, if
%    the hyphen is preceded by a positive space, breaking after the
%    hyphen is disallowed.
%
%    There should not be a discretionaty after a hyphen at the
%    beginning of a word, so it is prevented if preceded by a
%    skip. Unfortunately, this does handle cases like ``(-suffix)''.
%    |\nobreak| is always preceded by |\leavevmode|, in case the
%    shorthand starts a paragraph.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@usehyphen#1{%
  \leavevmode
  \ifdim\lastskip>\z@\mbox{#1}\else\nobreak#1\fi
  \nobreak\hskip\z@skip}
\def\bbl@@usehyphen#1{%
  \leavevmode\ifdim\lastskip>\z@\mbox{#1}\else#1\fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following macro inserts the hyphen char.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@hyphenchar{%
  \ifnum\hyphenchar\font=\m@ne
    \babelnullhyphen
  \else
    \char\hyphenchar\font
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Finally, we define the hyphen ``types''. Their names will not
%    change, so you may use them in |ldf|'s. After a space, the
%    |\mbox| in |\bbl@hy@nobreak| is redundant.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@hy@soft{\bbl@usehyphen{\discretionary{\bbl@hyphenchar}{}{}}}
\def\bbl@hy@@soft{\bbl@@usehyphen{\discretionary{\bbl@hyphenchar}{}{}}}
\def\bbl@hy@hard{\bbl@usehyphen\bbl@hyphenchar}
\def\bbl@hy@@hard{\bbl@@usehyphen\bbl@hyphenchar}
\def\bbl@hy@nobreak{\bbl@usehyphen{\mbox{\bbl@hyphenchar}}}
\def\bbl@hy@@nobreak{\mbox{\bbl@hyphenchar}}
\def\bbl@hy@repeat{%
  \bbl@usehyphen{%
    \discretionary{\bbl@hyphenchar}{\bbl@hyphenchar}{\bbl@hyphenchar}}}
\def\bbl@hy@@repeat{%
  \bbl@@usehyphen{%
    \discretionary{\bbl@hyphenchar}{\bbl@hyphenchar}{\bbl@hyphenchar}}}
\def\bbl@hy@empty{\hskip\z@skip}
\def\bbl@hy@@empty{\discretionary{}{}{}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@disc}
%    For some languages the macro |\bbl@disc| is used to ease the
%    insertion of discretionaries for letters that behave `abnormally'
%    at a breakpoint.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@disc#1#2{\nobreak\discretionary{#2-}{}{#1}\bbl@allowhyphens}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
% \subsection{Multiencoding strings}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/05}{Added tentative code for string
%  declarations}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/24}{Added hooks}
%
% The aim following commands is to provide a commom interface for
% strings in several encodings. They also contains several hooks which
% can be ued by \luatex{} and \xetex. The code is organized here with
% pseudo-guards, so we start with the basic commands.
%
%  \paragraph{Tools}
%
% But first, a couple of tools. The first one makes global a local
% variable. This is not the best solution, but it works.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Multiencoding strings}
\def\bbl@toglobal#1{\global\let#1#1}
\def\bbl@recatcode#1{%
  \@tempcnta="7F
  \def\bbl@tempa{%
    \ifnum\@tempcnta>"FF\else
      \catcode\@tempcnta=#1\relax
      \advance\@tempcnta\@ne
      \expandafter\bbl@tempa
    \fi}%
  \bbl@tempa}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The second one. We need to patch |\@uclclist|, but it is done once
% and only if |\SetCase| is used or if strings are encoded.  The code
% is far from satisfactory for several reasons, including the fact
% |\@uclclist| is not a list any more. Therefore a package option is
% added to ignore it. Instead of gobbling the macro
% getting the next two elements (usually |\reserved@a|), we pass it as
% argument to |\bbl@uclc|. The parser is restarted inside
% |\|\m{lang}|@bbl@uclc| because we do not know how many expansions
% are necessary (depends on whether strings are encoded). The last
% part is tricky -- when uppercasing, we have:
%\begin{verbatim}
% \let\bbl@tolower\@empty\bbl@toupper\@empty
%\end{verbatim}
% and starts over (and similarly when lowercasing).
%
%    \changes{babel~3.9l}{2014/07/29}{Now tries to catch the parsing
%    macro. Removed some redundant code. Option |nocase|.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@ifpackagewith{babel}{nocase}%
  {\let\bbl@patchuclc\relax}%
  {\def\bbl@patchuclc{%
    \global\let\bbl@patchuclc\relax
    \g@addto@macro\@uclclist{\reserved@b{\reserved@b\bbl@uclc}}%
    \gdef\bbl@uclc##1{%
      \let\bbl@encoded\bbl@encoded@uclc
      \bbl@ifunset{\languagename @bbl@uclc}% and resumes it
        {##1}%
        {\let\bbl@tempa##1\relax % Used by LANG@bbl@uclc
         \csname\languagename @bbl@uclc\endcsname}%
      {\bbl@tolower\@empty}{\bbl@toupper\@empty}}%
    \gdef\bbl@tolower{\csname\languagename @bbl@lc\endcsname}%
    \gdef\bbl@toupper{\csname\languagename @bbl@uc\endcsname}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*More package options>>
\DeclareOption{nocase}{}
%<</More package options>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The following package options control the behavior of |\SetString|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*More package options>>
\let\bbl@opt@strings\@nnil % accept strings=value
\DeclareOption{strings}{\def\bbl@opt@strings{\BabelStringsDefault}}
\DeclareOption{strings=encoded}{\let\bbl@opt@strings\relax}
\def\BabelStringsDefault{generic}
%<</More package options>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \paragraph{Main command} This is the main command.  With the
%    first use it is redefined to omit the basic setup in subsequent
%    blocks. We make sure strings contain actual letters in the range
%    128-255, not active characters.
%
%    \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/07/29}{Added starred variant. A bit of
%    clean up. Removed \cs{UseString}, which didn't work.}
%    \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/08/01}{Now several languages can be
%    processed with \cs{BabelLanguages}, if set in the ldf.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@onlypreamble\StartBabelCommands
\def\StartBabelCommands{%
  \begingroup
  \bbl@recatcode{11}%
  <@Macros local to BabelCommands@>
  \def\bbl@provstring##1##2{%
    \providecommand##1{##2}%
    \bbl@toglobal##1}%
  \global\let\bbl@scafter\@empty
  \let\StartBabelCommands\bbl@startcmds
  \ifx\BabelLanguages\relax
     \let\BabelLanguages\CurrentOption
  \fi
  \begingroup
  \let\bbl@screset\@nnil % local flag - disable 1st stopcommands
  \StartBabelCommands}
\def\bbl@startcmds{%
  \ifx\bbl@screset\@nnil\else
    \bbl@usehooks{stopcommands}{}%
  \fi
  \endgroup
  \begingroup
  \@ifstar
    {\ifx\bbl@opt@strings\@nnil
       \let\bbl@opt@strings\BabelStringsDefault
     \fi
     \bbl@startcmds@i}%
    \bbl@startcmds@i}
\def\bbl@startcmds@i#1#2{%
  \edef\bbl@L{\zap@space#1 \@empty}%
  \edef\bbl@G{\zap@space#2 \@empty}%
  \bbl@startcmds@ii}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Parse the encoding info to get the label, input, and font parts.
%
%    Select the behavior of |\SetString|. Thre are two main cases,
%    depending of if there is an optional argument: without it and
%    |strings=encoded|, strings are defined
%    always; otherwise, they are set only if they are still undefined
%    (ie, fallback values). With labelled blocks and
%    |strings=encoded|, define the strings, but with another value,
%    define strings only if the current label or font encoding is the
%    value of |strings|; otherwise (ie, no |strings| or a block whose
%    label is not in |strings=|) do nothing.
%
%    We presume the current block is not loaded, and therefore set
%    (above) a couple of default values to gobble the arguments. Then,
%    these macros are redefined if necessary according to several
%    parameters.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/08/04}{Use \cs{ProvideTextCommand}, which
%   does with encoded strings what the manual says.}
% \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/11/08}{Tidied up code related to
%  \cs{bbl@scswitch}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newcommand\bbl@startcmds@ii[1][\@empty]{%
  \let\SetString\@gobbletwo
  \let\bbl@stringdef\@gobbletwo
  \let\AfterBabelCommands\@gobble
  \ifx\@empty#1%
    \def\bbl@sc@label{generic}%
    \def\bbl@encstring##1##2{%
      \ProvideTextCommandDefault##1{##2}%
      \bbl@toglobal##1%
      \expandafter\bbl@toglobal\csname\string?\string##1\endcsname}%
    \let\bbl@sctest\in@true
  \else
    \let\bbl@sc@charset\space % <- zapped below
    \let\bbl@sc@fontenc\space % <-   "      "
    \def\bbl@tempa##1=##2\@nil{%
      \bbl@csarg\edef{sc@\zap@space##1 \@empty}{##2 }}%
    \bbl@vforeach{label=#1}{\bbl@tempa##1\@nil}%
    \def\bbl@tempa##1 ##2{% space -> comma
      ##1%
      \ifx\@empty##2\else\ifx,##1,\else,\fi\bbl@afterfi\bbl@tempa##2\fi}%
    \edef\bbl@sc@fontenc{\expandafter\bbl@tempa\bbl@sc@fontenc\@empty}%
    \edef\bbl@sc@label{\expandafter\zap@space\bbl@sc@label\@empty}%
    \edef\bbl@sc@charset{\expandafter\zap@space\bbl@sc@charset\@empty}%
    \def\bbl@encstring##1##2{%
      \bbl@foreach\bbl@sc@fontenc{%
        \bbl@ifunset{T@####1}%
          {}%
          {\ProvideTextCommand##1{####1}{##2}%
           \bbl@toglobal##1%
           \expandafter
           \bbl@toglobal\csname####1\string##1\endcsname}}}%
    \def\bbl@sctest{%
      \bbl@xin@{,\bbl@opt@strings,}{,\bbl@sc@label,\bbl@sc@fontenc,}}%
  \fi
  \ifx\bbl@opt@strings\@nnil         % ie, no strings key -> defaults
  \else\ifx\bbl@opt@strings\relax    % ie, strings=encoded
    \let\AfterBabelCommands\bbl@aftercmds
    \let\SetString\bbl@setstring
    \let\bbl@stringdef\bbl@encstring
  \else       % ie, strings=value
  \bbl@sctest
  \ifin@
    \let\AfterBabelCommands\bbl@aftercmds
    \let\SetString\bbl@setstring
    \let\bbl@stringdef\bbl@provstring
  \fi\fi\fi
  \bbl@scswitch
  \ifx\bbl@G\@empty
    \def\SetString##1##2{%
      \bbl@error{Missing group for string \string##1}%
        {You must assign strings to some category, typically\\%
         captions or extras, but you set none}}%
  \fi
  \ifx\@empty#1%
    \bbl@usehooks{defaultcommands}{}%
  \else
    \@expandtwoargs
    \bbl@usehooks{encodedcommands}{{\bbl@sc@charset}{\bbl@sc@fontenc}}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    There are two versions of |\bbl@scswitch|. The first version is
%    used when |ldf|s are read, and it makes sure
%    |\|\m{group}\m{language} is reset, but only once (|\bbl@screset|
%    is used to keep track of this). The second version is used in the
%    preamble and packages loaded after \babel{} and does nothing. The
%    macro |\bbl@forlang| loops |\bbl@L| but its body is executed only
%    if the value is in |\BabelLanguages| (inside \babel) or
%    |\date|\m{language} is defined (after \babel{} has been loaded).
%    There are also two version of |\bbl@forlang|. The first one skips
%    the current iteration if the language is not in |\BabelLanguages|
%    (used in |ldf|s), and the second one skips undefined languages
%    (after \babel{} has been loaded) .
%
%   \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@forlang#1#2{%
  \bbl@for#1\bbl@L{%
    \bbl@xin@{,#1,}{,\BabelLanguages,}%
    \ifin@#2\relax\fi}}
\def\bbl@scswitch{%
  \bbl@forlang\bbl@tempa{%
    \ifx\bbl@G\@empty\else
      \ifx\SetString\@gobbletwo\else
        \edef\bbl@GL{\bbl@G\bbl@tempa}%
        \bbl@xin@{,\bbl@GL,}{,\bbl@screset,}%
        \ifin@\else
          \global\expandafter\let\csname\bbl@GL\endcsname\@undefined
          \xdef\bbl@screset{\bbl@screset,\bbl@GL}%
        \fi
      \fi
    \fi}}
\AtEndOfPackage{%
  \def\bbl@forlang#1#2{\bbl@for#1\bbl@L{\bbl@ifunset{date#1}{}{#2}}}%
  \let\bbl@scswitch\relax}
\@onlypreamble\EndBabelCommands
\def\EndBabelCommands{%
  \bbl@usehooks{stopcommands}{}%
  \endgroup
  \endgroup
  \bbl@scafter}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now we define commands to be used inside |\StartBabelCommands|.
%
%    \paragraph{Strings} The following macro is the actual definition
%    of |\SetString| when it is ``active''
%
%    First save the ``switcher''. Create it if undefined. Strings are
%    defined only if undefined (ie, like |\providescommmand|). With
%    the event |stringprocess| you can preprocess the string by
%    manipulating the value of |\BabelString|. If there are several
%    hooks assigned to this event, preprocessing is done in the same
%    order as defined.  Finally, the string is set.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/07/29}{Added \cs{bbl@forlang} to ignore in
%   the preamble unknown languages, as described in the doc.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@setstring#1#2{%
  \bbl@forlang\bbl@tempa{%
    \edef\bbl@LC{\bbl@tempa\bbl@stripslash#1}%
    \bbl@ifunset{\bbl@LC}% eg, \germanchaptername
      {\global\expandafter  % TODO - con \bbl@exp ?
       \bbl@add\csname\bbl@G\bbl@tempa\expandafter\endcsname\expandafter
         {\expandafter\bbl@scset\expandafter#1\csname\bbl@LC\endcsname}}%
      {}%
    \def\BabelString{#2}%
    \bbl@usehooks{stringprocess}{}%
    \expandafter\bbl@stringdef
      \csname\bbl@LC\expandafter\endcsname\expandafter{\BabelString}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%     Now, some addtional stuff to be used when encoded strings are
%     used. Captions then include |\bbl@encoded| for string to be
%     expanded in case transformations. It is |\relax| by default, but
%     in |\MakeUppercase| and |\MakeLowercase| its value is a modified
%     expandable |\@changed@cmd|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/03/13}{Added code to expand captions in
%     case transformations.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bbl@opt@strings\relax
  \def\bbl@scset#1#2{\def#1{\bbl@encoded#2}}
  \bbl@patchuclc
  \let\bbl@encoded\relax
  \def\bbl@encoded@uclc#1{%
    \@inmathwarn#1%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname\cf@encoding\string#1\endcsname\relax
      \expandafter\ifx\csname ?\string#1\endcsname\relax
        \TextSymbolUnavailable#1%
      \else
        \csname ?\string#1\endcsname
      \fi
    \else
      \csname\cf@encoding\string#1\endcsname
    \fi}
\else
  \def\bbl@scset#1#2{\def#1{#2}}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Define |\SetStringLoop|, which is actually set inside
%    |\StartBabelCommands|. The current definition is
%    somewhat complicated because we need a count, but |\count@| is
%    not under our control (remember |\SetString| may call hooks).
%    Instead of defining a dedicated count, we just ``pre-expand''
%    its value.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/10/16}{Tidied up and bug fixed - first
%    element expanded prematurely.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Macros local to BabelCommands>>
\def\SetStringLoop##1##2{%
    \def\bbl@templ####1{\expandafter\noexpand\csname##1\endcsname}%
    \count@\z@
    \bbl@loop\bbl@tempa{##2}{% empty items and spaces are ok
      \advance\count@\@ne
      \toks@\expandafter{\bbl@tempa}%
      \bbl@exp{%
        \\\SetString\bbl@templ{\romannumeral\count@}{\the\toks@}%
        \count@=\the\count@\relax}}}%
%<</Macros local to BabelCommands>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \paragraph{Delaying code} Now the definition of
%    |\AfterBabelCommands| when it is activated.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@aftercmds#1{%
  \toks@\expandafter{\bbl@scafter#1}%
  \xdef\bbl@scafter{\the\toks@}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \paragraph{Case mapping}
%
% The command |\SetCase| provides a way to change the behavior of
% |\MakeUppercase| and |\MakeLowercase|. |\bbl@tempa| is set by the
% patched |\@uclclist| to the parsing command.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/11/08}{Use \cs{bbl@encstrings} - they
% should be defined always, even if no `strings'}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Macros local to BabelCommands>>
  \newcommand\SetCase[3][]{%
    \bbl@patchuclc
    \bbl@forlang\bbl@tempa{%
      \expandafter\bbl@encstring
        \csname\bbl@tempa @bbl@uclc\endcsname{\bbl@tempa##1}%
      \expandafter\bbl@encstring
        \csname\bbl@tempa @bbl@uc\endcsname{##2}%
      \expandafter\bbl@encstring
        \csname\bbl@tempa @bbl@lc\endcsname{##3}}}%
%<</Macros local to BabelCommands>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Macros to deal with case mapping for hyphenation. To decide if the
% document is monolingual or multilingual, we make a rough guess --
% just see if there is a comma in the languages list, built in the
% first pass of the package options.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Macros local to BabelCommands>>
  \newcommand\SetHyphenMap[1]{%
    \bbl@forlang\bbl@tempa{%
      \expandafter\bbl@stringdef
        \csname\bbl@tempa @bbl@hyphenmap\endcsname{##1}}}
%<</Macros local to BabelCommands>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%   There are 3 helper macros which do most of the work for you.
%
%   \begin{macrocode}
\newcommand\BabelLower[2]{% one to one.
  \ifnum\lccode#1=#2\else
    \babel@savevariable{\lccode#1}%
    \lccode#1=#2\relax
  \fi}
\newcommand\BabelLowerMM[4]{% many-to-many
  \@tempcnta=#1\relax
  \@tempcntb=#4\relax
  \def\bbl@tempa{%
    \ifnum\@tempcnta>#2\else
      \@expandtwoargs\BabelLower{\the\@tempcnta}{\the\@tempcntb}%
      \advance\@tempcnta#3\relax
      \advance\@tempcntb#3\relax
      \expandafter\bbl@tempa
    \fi}%
  \bbl@tempa}
\newcommand\BabelLowerMO[4]{% many-to-one
  \@tempcnta=#1\relax
  \def\bbl@tempa{%
    \ifnum\@tempcnta>#2\else
      \@expandtwoargs\BabelLower{\the\@tempcnta}{#4}%
      \advance\@tempcnta#3
      \expandafter\bbl@tempa
    \fi}%
  \bbl@tempa}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following package options control the behavior of
%    hyphenation mapping.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9t}{2017/04/28}{Renamed \cs{bbl@hymapopt} to
%    \cs{bbl@opt@hyphenmap} for consistency}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*More package options>>
\DeclareOption{hyphenmap=off}{\chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\z@}
\DeclareOption{hyphenmap=first}{\chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\@ne}
\DeclareOption{hyphenmap=select}{\chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\tw@}
\DeclareOption{hyphenmap=other}{\chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\thr@@}
\DeclareOption{hyphenmap=other*}{\chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap4\relax}
%<</More package options>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Initial setup to provide a default behavior if |hypenmap|
%    is not set.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AtEndOfPackage{%
  \ifx\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\@undefined
    \bbl@xin@{,}{\bbl@language@opts}%
    \chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\ifin@4\else\@ne\fi
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Macros common to a number of languages}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\set@low@box}
%    The following macro is used to lower quotes to the same level as
%    the comma.  It prepares its argument in box register~0.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Macros related to glyphs}
\def\set@low@box#1{\setbox\tw@\hbox{,}\setbox\z@\hbox{#1}%
    \dimen\z@\ht\z@ \advance\dimen\z@ -\ht\tw@%
    \setbox\z@\hbox{\lower\dimen\z@ \box\z@}\ht\z@\ht\tw@ \dp\z@\dp\tw@}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\save@sf@q}
%    The macro |\save@sf@q| is used to save and reset the current
%    space factor.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\save@sf@q#1{\leavevmode
  \begingroup
    \edef\@SF{\spacefactor\the\spacefactor}#1\@SF
  \endgroup}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Making glyphs available}
%
%    This section makes a number of glyphs available that either do not
%    exist in the \texttt{OT1} encoding and have to be `faked', or
%    that are not accessible through \file{T1enc.def}.
%
% \subsubsection{Quotation marks}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\quotedblbase}
%    In the \texttt{T1} encoding the opening double quote at the
%    baseline is available as a separate character, accessible via
%    |\quotedblbase|. In the \texttt{OT1} encoding it is not
%    available, therefore we make it available by lowering the normal
%    open quote character to the baseline.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommand{\quotedblbase}{OT1}{%
  \save@sf@q{\set@low@box{\textquotedblright\/}%
    \box\z@\kern-.04em\bbl@allowhyphens}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Make sure that when an encoding other than \texttt{OT1} or
%    \texttt{T1} is used this glyph can still be typeset.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\quotedblbase}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\quotedblbase}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\quotesinglbase}
%    We also need the single quote character at the baseline.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommand{\quotesinglbase}{OT1}{%
  \save@sf@q{\set@low@box{\textquoteright\/}%
    \box\z@\kern-.04em\bbl@allowhyphens}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Make sure that when an encoding other than \texttt{OT1} or
%    \texttt{T1} is used this glyph can still be typeset.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\quotesinglbase}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\quotesinglbase}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\guillemotleft}
%  \begin{macro}{\guillemotright}
%    The guillemet characters are not available in \texttt{OT1}
%    encoding. They are faked.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommand{\guillemotleft}{OT1}{%
  \ifmmode
    \ll
  \else
    \save@sf@q{\nobreak
      \raise.2ex\hbox{$\scriptscriptstyle\ll$}\bbl@allowhyphens}%
  \fi}
\ProvideTextCommand{\guillemotright}{OT1}{%
  \ifmmode
    \gg
  \else
    \save@sf@q{\nobreak
      \raise.2ex\hbox{$\scriptscriptstyle\gg$}\bbl@allowhyphens}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Make sure that when an encoding other than \texttt{OT1} or
%    \texttt{T1} is used these glyphs can still be typeset.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\guillemotleft}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\guillemotleft}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\guillemotright}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\guillemotright}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\guilsinglleft}
%  \begin{macro}{\guilsinglright}
%    The single guillemets are not available in \texttt{OT1}
%    encoding. They are faked.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommand{\guilsinglleft}{OT1}{%
  \ifmmode
    <%
  \else
    \save@sf@q{\nobreak
      \raise.2ex\hbox{$\scriptscriptstyle<$}\bbl@allowhyphens}%
  \fi}
\ProvideTextCommand{\guilsinglright}{OT1}{%
  \ifmmode
    >%
  \else
    \save@sf@q{\nobreak
      \raise.2ex\hbox{$\scriptscriptstyle>$}\bbl@allowhyphens}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Make sure that when an encoding other than \texttt{OT1} or
%    \texttt{T1} is used these glyphs can still be typeset.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\guilsinglleft}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\guilsinglleft}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\guilsinglright}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\guilsinglright}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsubsection{Letters}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\ij}
%  \begin{macro}{\IJ}
%    The dutch language uses the letter `ij'. It is available in
%    \texttt{T1} encoded fonts, but not in the \texttt{OT1} encoded
%    fonts. Therefore we fake it for the \texttt{OT1} encoding.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/28}{Removed the first \cs{allowhyphens}.
%    Moved the second one just after the kern.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\DeclareTextCommand{\ij}{OT1}{%
  i\kern-0.02em\bbl@allowhyphens j}
\DeclareTextCommand{\IJ}{OT1}{%
  I\kern-0.02em\bbl@allowhyphens J}
\DeclareTextCommand{\ij}{T1}{\char188}
\DeclareTextCommand{\IJ}{T1}{\char156}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Make sure that when an encoding other than \texttt{OT1} or
%    \texttt{T1} is used these glyphs can still be typeset.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\ij}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\ij}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\IJ}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\IJ}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\dj}
%  \begin{macro}{\DJ}
%    The croatian language needs the letters |\dj| and |\DJ|; they are
%    available in the \texttt{T1} encoding, but not in the
%    \texttt{OT1} encoding by default.
%
%    Some code to construct these glyphs for the \texttt{OT1} encoding
%    was made available to me by Stipcevic Mario,
%    (\texttt{stipcevic@olimp.irb.hr}).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\crrtic@{\hrule height0.1ex width0.3em}
\def\crttic@{\hrule height0.1ex width0.33em}
\def\ddj@{%
  \setbox0\hbox{d}\dimen@=\ht0
  \advance\dimen@1ex
  \dimen@.45\dimen@
  \dimen@ii\expandafter\rem@pt\the\fontdimen\@ne\font\dimen@
  \advance\dimen@ii.5ex
  \leavevmode\rlap{\raise\dimen@\hbox{\kern\dimen@ii\vbox{\crrtic@}}}}
\def\DDJ@{%
  \setbox0\hbox{D}\dimen@=.55\ht0
  \dimen@ii\expandafter\rem@pt\the\fontdimen\@ne\font\dimen@
  \advance\dimen@ii.15ex %            correction for the dash position
  \advance\dimen@ii-.15\fontdimen7\font %     correction for cmtt font
  \dimen\thr@@\expandafter\rem@pt\the\fontdimen7\font\dimen@
  \leavevmode\rlap{\raise\dimen@\hbox{\kern\dimen@ii\vbox{\crttic@}}}}
%
\DeclareTextCommand{\dj}{OT1}{\ddj@ d}
\DeclareTextCommand{\DJ}{OT1}{\DDJ@ D}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Make sure that when an encoding other than \texttt{OT1} or
%    \texttt{T1} is used these glyphs can still be typeset.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\dj}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\dj}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\DJ}{%
  \UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\DJ}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\SS}
%    For the \texttt{T1} encoding |\SS| is defined and selects a
%    specific glyph from the font, but for other encodings it is not
%    available. Therefore we make it available here.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\DeclareTextCommand{\SS}{OT1}{SS}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\SS}{\UseTextSymbol{OT1}{\SS}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsubsection{Shorthands for quotation marks}
%
%    Shorthands are provided for a number of different quotation
%    marks, which make them usable both outside and inside mathmode.
%    They are defined with |\ProvideTextCommandDefault|, but this is
%    very likely not required because their definitions are based on
%    encoding dependent macros.
%
% \changes{babel~3.16}{2018/01/02}{Adapted to TU and refactored -
%  redundant code.}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\glq}
%  \begin{macro}{\grq}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/05/02}{Made \cs{glq} fontencoding
%    dependent as well}
%
%    The `german' single quotes.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\glq}{%
  \textormath{\quotesinglbase}{\mbox{\quotesinglbase}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The definition of |\grq| depends on the fontencoding. With
%    \texttt{T1} encoding no extra kerning is needed.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommand{\grq}{T1}{%
  \textormath{\textquoteleft}{\mbox{\textquoteleft}}}
\ProvideTextCommand{\grq}{TU}{%
  \textormath{\textquoteleft}{\mbox{\textquoteleft}}}
\ProvideTextCommand{\grq}{OT1}{%
  \save@sf@q{\kern-.0125em
    \textormath{\textquoteleft}{\mbox{\textquoteleft}}%
    \kern.07em\relax}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\grq}{\UseTextSymbol{OT1}\grq}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\glqq}
%  \begin{macro}{\grqq}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/05/02}{Made \cs{grqq} fontencoding
%    dependent as well}
%
%    The `german' double quotes.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\glqq}{%
  \textormath{\quotedblbase}{\mbox{\quotedblbase}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The definition of |\grqq| depends on the fontencoding. With
%    \texttt{T1} encoding no extra kerning is needed.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommand{\grqq}{T1}{%
  \textormath{\textquotedblleft}{\mbox{\textquotedblleft}}}
\ProvideTextCommand{\grqq}{TU}{%
  \textormath{\textquotedblleft}{\mbox{\textquotedblleft}}}
\ProvideTextCommand{\grqq}{OT1}{%
  \save@sf@q{\kern-.07em
    \textormath{\textquotedblleft}{\mbox{\textquotedblleft}}%
    \kern.07em\relax}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\grqq}{\UseTextSymbol{OT1}\grqq}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\flq}
%  \begin{macro}{\frq}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/05/02}{Made \cs{flq} and \cs{frq}
%    fontencoding dependent}
%
%    The `french' single guillemets.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\flq}{%
  \textormath{\guilsinglleft}{\mbox{\guilsinglleft}}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\frq}{%
  \textormath{\guilsinglright}{\mbox{\guilsinglright}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\flqq}
%  \begin{macro}{\frqq}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/05/02}{Made \cs{flqq} and \cs{frqq}
%    fontencoding dependent}
%
%    The `french' double guillemets.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\flqq}{%
  \textormath{\guillemotleft}{\mbox{\guillemotleft}}}
\ProvideTextCommandDefault{\frqq}{%
  \textormath{\guillemotright}{\mbox{\guillemotright}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsubsection{Umlauts and tremas}
%
%    The command |\"| needs to have a different effect for different
%    languages. For German for instance, the `umlaut' should be
%    positioned lower than the default position for placing it over
%    the letters a, o, u, A, O and U. When placed over an e, i, E or I
%    it can retain its normal position. For Dutch the same glyph is
%    always placed in the lower position.
%
%  \begin{macro}{\umlauthigh}
%
% \changes{v3.8a}{2004/02/19}{Use \cs{leavevmode}\cs{bgroup} to
%    prevent problems when this command occurs in vertical mode.}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\umlautlow}
%    To be able to provide both positions of |\"| we provide two
%    commands to switch the positioning, the default will be
%    |\umlauthigh| (the normal positioning).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\umlauthigh{%
  \def\bbl@umlauta##1{\leavevmode\bgroup%
      \expandafter\accent\csname\f@encoding dqpos\endcsname
      ##1\bbl@allowhyphens\egroup}%
  \let\bbl@umlaute\bbl@umlauta}
\def\umlautlow{%
  \def\bbl@umlauta{\protect\lower@umlaut}}
\def\umlautelow{%
  \def\bbl@umlaute{\protect\lower@umlaut}}
\umlauthigh
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\lower@umlaut}
%    The command |\lower@umlaut| is used to position the |\"| closer
%    to the letter.
%
%    We want the umlaut character lowered, nearer to the letter. To do
%    this we need an extra \meta{dimen} register.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\expandafter\ifx\csname U@D\endcsname\relax
  \csname newdimen\endcsname\U@D
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following code fools \TeX's \texttt{make\_accent} procedure
%    about the current x-height of the font to force another placement
%    of the umlaut character.
%    First we have to save the current x-height of the font, because
%    we'll change this font dimension and this is always done
%    globally.
%
% \changes{v3.8a}{2004/02/19}{Use \cs{leavevmode}\cs{bgroup} to
%    prevent problems when this command occurs in vertical mode.}
%
%    Then we compute the new x-height in such a way that the umlaut
%    character is lowered to the base character.  The value of
%    \texttt{.45ex} depends on the \MF\ parameters with which the
%    fonts were built.  (Just try out, which value will look best.)
%    If the new x-height is too low, it is not changed.
%    Finally we call the |\accent| primitive, reset the old x-height
%    and insert the base character in the argument.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\lower@umlaut#1{%
  \leavevmode\bgroup
    \U@D 1ex%
    {\setbox\z@\hbox{%
      \expandafter\char\csname\f@encoding dqpos\endcsname}%
      \dimen@ -.45ex\advance\dimen@\ht\z@
      \ifdim 1ex<\dimen@ \fontdimen5\font\dimen@ \fi}%
    \expandafter\accent\csname\f@encoding dqpos\endcsname
    \fontdimen5\font\U@D #1%
  \egroup}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%    For all vowels we declare |\"| to be a composite command which
%    uses |\bbl@umlauta| or |\bbl@umlaute| to position the umlaut
%    character. We need to be sure that these definitions override the
%    ones that are provided when the package \pkg{fontenc} with
%    option \Lopt{OT1} is used. Therefore these declarations are
%    postponed until the beginning of the document. Note these
%    definitions only apply to some languages, but
%    babel sets them for \textit{all} languages -- you may want to
%    redefine |\bbl@umlauta| and/or |\bbl@umlaute| for a language
%    in the corresponding |ldf| (using the babel switching mechanism,
%    of course).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AtBeginDocument{%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{a}{\bbl@umlauta{a}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{e}{\bbl@umlaute{e}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{i}{\bbl@umlaute{\i}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{\i}{\bbl@umlaute{\i}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{o}{\bbl@umlauta{o}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{u}{\bbl@umlauta{u}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{A}{\bbl@umlauta{A}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{E}{\bbl@umlaute{E}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{I}{\bbl@umlaute{I}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{O}{\bbl@umlauta{O}}%
  \DeclareTextCompositeCommand{\"}{OT1}{U}{\bbl@umlauta{U}}%
}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Finally, the default is to use English as the main language.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012-05-17}{Languages are best assigned with
%    \cs{chardef}, not \cs{let}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\l@english\@undefined
  \chardef\l@english\z@
\fi
\main@language{english}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Layout}
%
% \textbf{Work in progress}.
%
% Layout is mainly intended to set bidi documents, but there is at
% least a tool useful in general.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Bidi layout}
\providecommand\IfBabelLayout[3]{#3}%
\newcommand\BabelPatchSection[1]{%
  \@ifundefined{#1}{}{%
    \bbl@exp{\let\<bbl@ss@#1>\<#1>}%
    \@namedef{#1}{%
      \@ifstar{\bbl@presec@s{#1}}%
              {\@dblarg{\bbl@presec@x{#1}}}}}}
\def\bbl@presec@x#1[#2]#3{%
  \bbl@exp{%
    \\\select@language@x{\bbl@main@language}%
    \\\@nameuse{bbl@sspre@#1}%
    \\\@nameuse{bbl@ss@#1}%
      [\\\foreignlanguage{\languagename}{\unexpanded{#2}}]%
      {\\\foreignlanguage{\languagename}{\unexpanded{#3}}}%
    \\\select@language@x{\languagename}}}
\def\bbl@presec@s#1#2{%
  \bbl@exp{%
    \\\select@language@x{\bbl@main@language}%
    \\\@nameuse{bbl@sspre@#1}%
    \\\@nameuse{bbl@ss@#1}*%
      {\\\foreignlanguage{\languagename}{\unexpanded{#2}}}%
    \\\select@language@x{\languagename}}}
\IfBabelLayout{sectioning}%
  {\BabelPatchSection{part}%
   \BabelPatchSection{chapter}%
   \BabelPatchSection{section}%
   \BabelPatchSection{subsection}%
   \BabelPatchSection{subsubsection}%
   \BabelPatchSection{paragraph}%
   \BabelPatchSection{subparagraph}%
   \def\babel@toc#1{%
     \select@language@x{\bbl@main@language}}}{}
\IfBabelLayout{captions}%
  {\BabelPatchSection{caption}}{}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now we load definition files for engines.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Input engine specific macros}
\ifcase\bbl@engine
  \input txtbabel.def
\or
  \input luababel.def
\or
  \input xebabel.def
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.18}{2018/02/14}{Moved \cs{babelprovide}, also for
%   plain}
%
% \subsection{Creating languages}
%
% |\babelprovide| is a general purpose tool for creating
% languages. Currently it just creates the language infrastructure,
% but in the future it will be able to read data from |ini| files, as
% well as to create variants. Unlike the \textsf{nil} pseudo-language,
% captions are defined, but with a warning to invite the user to
% provide the real string.
%
% \changes{3.10}{2017/05/19}{Added \cs{babelprovide}}
% \changes{3.13}{2017/08/30}{Added \cs{import}, which also reads
% dates. Some refactoring in the ini reader.}
% \changes{3.15}{2017/10/30}{New keys script, language}
% \changes{3.16}{2018/01/02}{Make sure ensuring works even before
%   the language is selected}
% \changes{babel~3.19}{2018/04/23}{New option - mapfont. Currently
%   only with direction}
% \changes{babel~3.20}{2018/05/01}{Handle native digits (TeX level).
%   New option - maparabic.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Creating languages and reading ini files}
\newcommand\babelprovide[2][]{%
  \let\bbl@savelangname\languagename
  \def\languagename{#2}%
  \let\bbl@KVP@captions\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@import\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@main\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@script\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@language\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@dir\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@hyphenrules\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@mapfont\@nil
  \let\bbl@KVP@maparabic\@nil
  \bbl@forkv{#1}{\bbl@csarg\def{KVP@##1}{##2}}%  TODO - error handling
  \ifx\bbl@KVP@captions\@nil
    \let\bbl@KVP@captions\bbl@KVP@import
  \fi
  \bbl@ifunset{date#2}%
    {\bbl@provide@new{#2}}%
    {\bbl@ifblank{#1}%
      {\bbl@error
        {If you want to modify `#2' you must tell how in\\%
         the optional argument. Currently there are three\\%
         options: captions=lang-tag, hyphenrules=lang-list\\%
         import=lang-tag}%
        {Use this macro as documented}}%
      {\bbl@provide@renew{#2}}}%
  \bbl@exp{\\\babelensure[exclude=\\\today]{#2}}%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@ensure@\languagename}%
    {\bbl@exp{%
      \\\DeclareRobustCommand\<bbl@ensure@\languagename>[1]{%
        \\\foreignlanguage{\languagename}%
        {####1}}}}%
    {}%
  \ifx\bbl@KVP@script\@nil\else
    \bbl@csarg\edef{sname@#2}{\bbl@KVP@script}%
  \fi
  \ifx\bbl@KVP@language\@nil\else
    \bbl@csarg\edef{lname@#2}{\bbl@KVP@language}%
  \fi
  \ifx\bbl@KVP@mapfont\@nil\else
    \bbl@ifsamestring{\bbl@KVP@mapfont}{direction}{}%
      {\bbl@error{Option `\bbl@KVP@mapfont' unknown for\\%
                  mapfont. Use `direction'.%
                 {See the manual for details.}}}%
    \bbl@ifunset{bbl@lsys@\languagename}{\bbl@provide@lsys{\languagename}}{}%
    \bbl@ifunset{bbl@wdir@\languagename}{\bbl@provide@dirs{\languagename}}{}%
    \ifx\bbl@mapselect\@undefined
      \AtBeginDocument{%
        \expandafter\bbl@add\csname selectfont \endcsname{{\bbl@mapselect}}%
        {\selectfont}}%
      \def\bbl@mapselect{%
        \let\bbl@mapselect\relax
        \edef\bbl@prefontid{\fontid\font}}%
      \def\bbl@mapdir##1{%
        {\def\languagename{##1}\bbl@switchfont
         \directlua{Babel.fontmap
           [\the\csname bbl@wdir@##1\endcsname]%
           [\bbl@prefontid]=\fontid\font}}}%
    \fi
    \bbl@exp{\\\bbl@add\\\bbl@mapselect{\\\bbl@mapdir{\languagename}}}%
  \fi
  \ifcase\bbl@engine\else
    \bbl@ifunset{bbl@dgnat@\languagename}{}%
      {\expandafter\ifx\csname bbl@dgnat@\languagename\endcsname\@empty\else
        \expandafter\expandafter\expandafter
        \bbl@setdigits\csname bbl@dgnat@\languagename\endcsname
        \ifx\bbl@KVP@maparabic\@nil\else
          \expandafter\let\expandafter\@arabic
            \csname bbl@counter@\languagename\endcsname
        \fi
      \fi}%
  \fi
  \let\languagename\bbl@savelangname}
\def\bbl@setdigits#1#2#3#4#5{%
  \bbl@exp{%
    \def\<\languagename digits>####1{%       ie, \langdigits
      \<bbl@digits@\languagename>####1\\\@nil}%
    \def\<\languagename counter>####1{%      ie, \langcounter
      \\\expandafter\<bbl@counter@\languagename>%
      \\\csname c@####1\endcsname}%
    \def\<bbl@counter@\languagename>####1{% ie, \bbl@counter@lang
      \\\expandafter\<bbl@digits@\languagename>%
      \\\number####1\\\@nil}}%
  \def\bbl@tempa##1##2##3##4##5{%
    \bbl@exp{%    Wow, quite a lot of hashes! :-(
      \def\<bbl@digits@\languagename>########1{%
       \\\ifx########1\\\@nil              % ie, \bbl@digits@lang
       \\\else
         \\\ifx0########1#1%
         \\\else\\\ifx1########1#2%
         \\\else\\\ifx2########1#3%
         \\\else\\\ifx3########1#4%
         \\\else\\\ifx4########1#5%
         \\\else\\\ifx5########1##1%
         \\\else\\\ifx6########1##2%
         \\\else\\\ifx7########1##3%
         \\\else\\\ifx8########1##4%
         \\\else\\\ifx9########1##5%
         \\\else########1%
         \\\fi\\\fi\\\fi\\\fi\\\fi\\\fi\\\fi\\\fi\\\fi\\\fi
         \\\expandafter\<bbl@digits@\languagename>%
       \\\fi}}}%
  \bbl@tempa}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Depending on whether or not the language exists, we define two macros.
%
% \changes{3.22}{2018/06/05}{Fix - Error with \cs{chapter} if empty in ini.}-
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@provide@new#1{%
  \@namedef{date#1}{}% marks lang exists - required by \StartBabelCommands
  \@namedef{extras#1}{}%
  \@namedef{noextras#1}{}%
  \StartBabelCommands*{#1}{captions}%
    \ifx\bbl@KVP@captions\@nil %      and also if import, implicit
      \def\bbl@tempb##1{%             elt for \bbl@captionslist
        \ifx##1\@empty\else
          \bbl@exp{%
            \\\SetString\\##1{%
              \\\bbl@nocaption{\bbl@stripslash##1}{#1\bbl@stripslash##1}}}%
          \expandafter\bbl@tempb
        \fi}%
      \expandafter\bbl@tempb\bbl@captionslist\@empty
    \else
      \bbl@read@ini{\bbl@KVP@captions}%  Here all letters cat = 11
      \bbl@after@ini
      \bbl@savestrings
    \fi
  \StartBabelCommands*{#1}{date}%
    \ifx\bbl@KVP@import\@nil
      \bbl@exp{%
        \\\SetString\\\today{\\\bbl@nocaption{today}{#1today}}}%
    \else
      \bbl@savetoday
      \bbl@savedate
    \fi
  \EndBabelCommands
  \bbl@exp{%
    \def\<#1hyphenmins>{%
      {\bbl@ifunset{bbl@lfthm@#1}{2}{\@nameuse{bbl@lfthm@#1}}}%
      {\bbl@ifunset{bbl@rgthm@#1}{3}{\@nameuse{bbl@rgthm@#1}}}}}%
  \bbl@provide@hyphens{#1}%
  \ifx\bbl@KVP@main\@nil\else
     \expandafter\main@language\expandafter{#1}%
  \fi}
\def\bbl@provide@renew#1{%
  \ifx\bbl@KVP@captions\@nil\else
    \StartBabelCommands*{#1}{captions}%
      \bbl@read@ini{\bbl@KVP@captions}%   Here all letters cat = 11
      \bbl@after@ini
      \bbl@savestrings
    \EndBabelCommands
 \fi
 \ifx\bbl@KVP@import\@nil\else
   \StartBabelCommands*{#1}{date}%
     \bbl@savetoday
     \bbl@savedate
   \EndBabelCommands
  \fi
  \bbl@provide@hyphens{#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The |hyphenrules| option is handled with an auxiliary macro.
%
% \changes{3.14}{2017/10/03}{Take into account ini settings for
% hyphenrules if `import'.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@provide@hyphens#1{%
  \let\bbl@tempa\relax
  \ifx\bbl@KVP@hyphenrules\@nil\else
    \bbl@replace\bbl@KVP@hyphenrules{ }{,}%
    \bbl@foreach\bbl@KVP@hyphenrules{%
      \ifx\bbl@tempa\relax    %  if not yet found
        \bbl@ifsamestring{##1}{+}%
          {{\bbl@exp{\\\addlanguage\<l@##1>}}}%
          {}%
        \bbl@ifunset{l@##1}%
           {}%
           {\bbl@exp{\let\bbl@tempa\<l@##1>}}%
      \fi}%
  \fi
  \ifx\bbl@tempa\relax %        if no opt or no language in opt found
    \ifx\bbl@KVP@import\@nil\else % if importing
      \bbl@exp{%                and hyphenrules is not empty
        \\\bbl@ifblank{\@nameuse{bbl@hyphr@#1}}%
          {}%
          {\let\\\bbl@tempa\<l@\@nameuse{bbl@hyphr@\languagename}>}}%
    \fi
  \fi
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@tempa}%       ie, relax or undefined
    {\bbl@ifunset{l@#1}%         no hyphenrules found - fallback
       {\bbl@exp{\\\adddialect\<l@#1>\language}}%
       {}}%                      so, l@<lang> is ok - nothing to do
    {\bbl@exp{\\\adddialect\<l@#1>\bbl@tempa}}}%  found in opt list or ini
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The reader of |ini| files. There are 3 possible cases: a section name
% (in the form |[...]|), a comment (starting with |;|) and a
% key/value pair. \textit{TODO - Work in progress.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@read@ini#1{%
  \openin1=babel-#1.ini
  \ifeof1
    \bbl@error
      {There is no ini file for the requested language\\%
       (#1). Perhaps you misspelled it or your installation\\%
       is not complete.}%
      {Fix the name or reinstall babel.}%
  \else
    \let\bbl@section\@empty
    \let\bbl@savestrings\@empty
    \let\bbl@savetoday\@empty
    \let\bbl@savedate\@empty
    \let\bbl@inireader\bbl@iniskip
    \bbl@info{Importing data from babel-#1.ini for \languagename}%
    \loop
    \if T\ifeof1F\fi T\relax % Trick, because inside \loop
      \endlinechar\m@ne
      \read1 to \bbl@line
      \endlinechar`\^^M
      \ifx\bbl@line\@empty\else
        \expandafter\bbl@iniline\bbl@line\bbl@iniline
      \fi
    \repeat
  \fi}
\def\bbl@iniline#1\bbl@iniline{%
  \@ifnextchar[\bbl@inisec{\@ifnextchar;\bbl@iniskip\bbl@inireader}#1\@@}% ]
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The special cases for comment lines and sections are handled by the
% two following commands. In sections, we provide the posibility to
% take extra actions at the end or at the start (TODO - but note the last
% section is not ended). By default, key=val pairs are ignored.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@iniskip#1\@@{}%      if starts with ;
\def\bbl@inisec[#1]#2\@@{%    if starts with opening bracket
  \@nameuse{bbl@secpost@\bbl@section}%  ends previous section
  \def\bbl@section{#1}%
  \@nameuse{bbl@secpre@\bbl@section}%   starts current section
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@secline@#1}%
    {\let\bbl@inireader\bbl@iniskip}%
    {\bbl@exp{\let\\\bbl@inireader\<bbl@secline@#1>}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Reads a key=val line and stores the trimmed val in
% |\bbl@@kv@<section>.<key>|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@inikv#1=#2\@@{%     key=value
  \bbl@trim@def\bbl@tempa{#1}%
  \bbl@trim\toks@{#2}%
  \bbl@csarg\edef{@kv@\bbl@section.\bbl@tempa}{\the\toks@}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The previous assignments are local, so we need to export them. If
% the value is empty, we can provide a default value.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@exportkey#1#2#3{%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@@kv@#2}%
    {\bbl@csarg\gdef{#1@\languagename}{#3}}%
    {\expandafter\ifx\csname bbl@@kv@#2\endcsname\@empty
       \bbl@csarg\gdef{#1@\languagename}{#3}%
     \else
       \bbl@exp{\global\let\<bbl@#1@\languagename>\<bbl@@kv@#2>}%
     \fi}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Key-value pairs are treated differently depending on the section in
% the |ini| file.  The following macros are the readers for
% |identification| and |typography|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\bbl@secline@identification\bbl@inikv
\def\bbl@secpost@identification{%
  \bbl@exportkey{lname}{identification.name.english}{}%
  \bbl@exportkey{lbcp}{identification.tag.bcp47}{}%
  \bbl@exportkey{lotf}{identification.tag.opentype}{dflt}%
  \bbl@exportkey{sname}{identification.script.name}{}%
  \bbl@exportkey{sbcp}{identification.script.tag.bcp47}{}%
  \bbl@exportkey{sotf}{identification.script.tag.opentype}{DFLT}}
\let\bbl@secline@typography\bbl@inikv
\let\bbl@secline@numbers\bbl@inikv
\def\bbl@after@ini{%
  \bbl@exportkey{lfthm}{typography.lefthyphenmin}{2}%
  \bbl@exportkey{rgthm}{typography.righthyphenmin}{3}%
  \bbl@exportkey{hyphr}{typography.hyphenrules}{}%
  \bbl@exportkey{dgnat}{numbers.digits.native}{}%
  \bbl@xin@{0.5}{\@nameuse{bbl@@kv@identification.version}}%
  \ifin@
    \bbl@warning{%
      There are neither captions nor date in `\languagename'.\\%
      It may not be suitable for proper typesetting, and it\\%
      could change. Reported}%
  \fi
  \bbl@xin@{0.9}{\@nameuse{bbl@@kv@identification.version}}%
  \ifin@
    \bbl@warning{%
      The `\languagename' date format may not be suitable\\%
      for proper typesetting, and therefore it very likely will\\%
      change in a future release. Reported}%
  \fi
  \bbl@toglobal\bbl@savetoday
  \bbl@toglobal\bbl@savedate}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Now |captions| and |captions.licr|, depending on the engine. And
% also for dates. They rely on a few auxilary macros.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifcase\bbl@engine
  \bbl@csarg\def{secline@captions.licr}#1=#2\@@{%
    \bbl@ini@captions@aux{#1}{#2}}
  \bbl@csarg\def{secline@date.gregorian}#1=#2\@@{%       for defaults
    \bbl@ini@dategreg#1...\relax{#2}}
  \bbl@csarg\def{secline@date.gregorian.licr}#1=#2\@@{%  override
    \bbl@ini@dategreg#1...\relax{#2}}
\else
  \def\bbl@secline@captions#1=#2\@@{%
    \bbl@ini@captions@aux{#1}{#2}}
  \bbl@csarg\def{secline@date.gregorian}#1=#2\@@{%
    \bbl@ini@dategreg#1...\relax{#2}}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The auxiliary macro for captions define |\<caption>name|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@ini@captions@aux#1#2{%
  \bbl@trim@def\bbl@tempa{#1}%
  \bbl@ifblank{#2}%
    {\bbl@exp{%
       \toks@{\\\bbl@nocaption{\bbl@tempa}{\languagename\bbl@tempa name}}}}%
    {\bbl@trim\toks@{#2}}%
  \bbl@exp{%
    \\\bbl@add\\\bbl@savestrings{%
      \\\SetString\<\bbl@tempa name>{\the\toks@}}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% But dates are more complex. The full date format is stores in
% |date.gregorian|, so we must read it in non-Unicode engines, too.
%
% \changes{3.16}{2018/01/02}{Fix - dates were severely broken.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@csarg\def{secpre@date.gregorian.licr}{%
  \ifcase\bbl@engine\let\bbl@savedate\@empty\fi}
\def\bbl@ini@dategreg#1.#2.#3.#4\relax#5{% TODO - ignore with 'captions'
  \bbl@trim@def\bbl@tempa{#1.#2}%
  \bbl@ifsamestring{\bbl@tempa}{months.wide}%
    {\bbl@trim@def\bbl@tempa{#3}%
     \bbl@trim\toks@{#5}%
     \bbl@exp{%
      \\\bbl@add\\\bbl@savedate{%
        \\\SetString\<month\romannumeral\bbl@tempa name>{\the\toks@}}}}%
    {\bbl@ifsamestring{\bbl@tempa}{date.long}%
      {\bbl@trim@def\bbl@toreplace{#5}%
       \bbl@TG@@date
       \global\bbl@csarg\let{date@\languagename}\bbl@toreplace
       \bbl@exp{%
         \gdef\<\languagename date>{\\\protect\<\languagename date >}%
         \gdef\<\languagename date >####1####2####3{%
           \\\bbl@usedategrouptrue
           \<bbl@ensure@\languagename>{%
             \<bbl@date@\languagename>{####1}{####2}{####3}}}%
         \\\bbl@add\\\bbl@savetoday{%
           \\\SetString\\\today{%
             \<\languagename date>{\\\the\year}{\\\the\month}{\\\the\day}}}}}}%
      {}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Dates will require some macros for the basic formatting. They may be
% redefined by language, so ``semi-public'' names (camel case) are
% used. Oddly enough, the CLDR places particles like “de”
% inconsistenly in either in the date or in the month name.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newcommand\BabelDateSpace{\nobreakspace}
\newcommand\BabelDateDot{.\@}
\newcommand\BabelDated[1]{{\number#1}}
\newcommand\BabelDatedd[1]{{\ifnum#1<10 0\fi\number#1}}
\newcommand\BabelDateM[1]{{\number#1}}
\newcommand\BabelDateMM[1]{{\ifnum#1<10 0\fi\number#1}}
\newcommand\BabelDateMMMM[1]{{%
  \csname month\romannumeral#1name\endcsname}}%
\newcommand\BabelDatey[1]{{\number#1}}%
\newcommand\BabelDateyy[1]{{%
  \ifnum#1<10 0\number#1 %
  \else\ifnum#1<100 \number#1 %
  \else\ifnum#1<1000 \expandafter\@gobble\number#1 %
  \else\ifnum#1<10000 \expandafter\@gobbletwo\number#1 %
  \else
    \bbl@error
      {Currently two-digit years are restricted to the\\
       range 0-9999.}%
      {There is little you can do. Sorry.}%
  \fi\fi\fi\fi}}
\newcommand\BabelDateyyyy[1]{{\number#1}}
\def\bbl@replace@finish@iii#1{%
  \bbl@exp{\def\\#1####1####2####3{\the\toks@}}}
\def\bbl@TG@@date{%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[ ]}{\BabelDateSpace{}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[.]}{\BabelDateDot{}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[d]}{\BabelDated{####3}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[dd]}{\BabelDatedd{####3}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[M]}{\BabelDateM{####2}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[MM]}{\BabelDateMM{####2}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[MMMM]}{\BabelDateMMMM{####2}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[y]}{\BabelDatey{####1}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[yy]}{\BabelDateyy{####1}}%
  \bbl@replace\bbl@toreplace{[yyyy]}{\BabelDateyyyy{####1}}%
% Note after \bbl@replace \toks@ contains the resulting string.
% TODO - Using this implicit behavior doesn't seem a good idea.
  \bbl@replace@finish@iii\bbl@toreplace}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Language and Script values to be used when defining a font or
% setting the direction are set with the following macros.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@provide@lsys#1{%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@lname@#1}%
    {\bbl@ini@ids{#1}}%
    {}%
  \bbl@csarg\let{lsys@#1}\@empty
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@sname@#1}{\bbl@csarg\gdef{sname@#1}{Default}}{}%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@sotf#1}{\bbl@csarg\gdef{sotf@#1}{DFLT}}{}%
  \bbl@csarg\bbl@add@list{lsys@#1}{Script=\bbl@cs{sname@#1}}%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@lname@#1}{}%
    {\bbl@csarg\bbl@add@list{lsys@#1}{Language=\bbl@cs{lname@#1}}}%
  \bbl@csarg\bbl@toglobal{lsys@#1}}%
 %  \bbl@exp{% TODO - should be global
 %    \<keys_if_exist:nnF>{fontspec-opentype/Script}{\bbl@cs{sname@#1}}%
 %      {\\\newfontscript{\bbl@cs{sname@#1}}{\bbl@cs{sotf@#1}}}%
 %    \<keys_if_exist:nnF>{fontspec-opentype/Language}{\bbl@cs{lname@#1}}%
 %      {\\\newfontlanguage{\bbl@cs{lname@#1}}{\bbl@cs{lotf@#1}}}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The following |ini| reader ignores everything but the
% |identification| section. It is called when a font is defined (ie,
% when the language is first selected) to know which script/language
% must be enabled. This means we must make sure a few characters are
% not active. The |ini| is not read directly, but with a proxy |tex|
% file named as the language.
%
% \changes{3.16}{2018/01/02}{Load ids inside a box, to prevent extra
% spaces.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@ini@ids#1{%
  \def\BabelBeforeIni##1##2{%
    \begingroup
      \bbl@add\bbl@secpost@identification{\closein1 }%
      \catcode`\[=12 \catcode`\]=12 \catcode`\==12 %
      \bbl@read@ini{##1}%
    \endgroup}%           boxed, to avoid extra spaces:
  {\setbox\z@\hbox{\InputIfFileExists{babel-#1.tex}{}{}}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \section{The kernel of Babel (\texttt{babel.def}, only \LaTeX)}
%
% \subsection{The redefinition of the style commands}
%
%    The rest of the code in this file can only be processed by
%    \LaTeX, so we check the current format. If it is plain \TeX,
%    processing should stop here. But, because of the need to limit
%    the scope of the definition of |\format|, a macro that is used
%    locally in the following |\if|~statement, this comparison is done
%    inside a group. To prevent \TeX\ from complaining about an
%    unclosed group, the processing of the command |\endinput| is
%    deferred until after the group is closed. This is accomplished by
%    the command |\aftergroup|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
{\def\format{lplain}
\ifx\fmtname\format
\else
  \def\format{LaTeX2e}
  \ifx\fmtname\format
  \else
    \aftergroup\endinput
  \fi
\fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Cross referencing macros}
%
%    The \LaTeX\ book states:
%  \begin{quote}
%    The \emph{key} argument is any sequence of letters, digits, and
%    punctuation symbols; upper- and lowercase letters are regarded as
%    different.
%  \end{quote}
%    When the above quote should still be true when a document is
%    typeset in a language that has active characters, special care
%    has to be taken of the category codes of these characters when
%    they appear in an argument of the cross referencing macros.
%
%    When a cross referencing command processes its argument, all
%    tokens in this argument should be character tokens with category
%    `letter' or `other'.
%
%    The only way to accomplish this in most cases is to use the trick
%    described in the \TeX book~\cite{DEK} (Appendix~D, page~382).
%    The primitive |\meaning| applied to a token expands to the
%    current meaning of this token.  For example, `|\meaning\A|' with
%    |\A| defined as `|\def\A#1{\B}|' expands to the characters
%    `|macro:#1->\B|' with all category codes set to `other' or
%    `space'.
%  \begin{macro}{\newlabel}
%    The macro |\label| writes a line with a |\newlabel| command
%    into the |.aux| file to define labels.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%\bbl@redefine\newlabel#1#2{%
%  \@safe@activestrue\org@newlabel{#1}{#2}\@safe@activesfalse}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\@newl@bel}
%    We need to change the definition of the \LaTeX-internal macro
%    |\@newl@bel|. This is needed because we need to make sure that
%    shorthand characters expand to their non-active version.
%
%    The following package options control which macros are to be
%    redefined.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*More package options>>
\DeclareOption{safe=none}{\let\bbl@opt@safe\@empty}
\DeclareOption{safe=bib}{\def\bbl@opt@safe{B}}
\DeclareOption{safe=ref}{\def\bbl@opt@safe{R}}
%<</More package options>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    First we open a new group to keep the changed setting of
%    |\protect| local and then we set the |@safe@actives| switch to
%    true to make sure that any shorthand that appears in any of the
%    arguments immediately expands to its non-active self.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Cross referencing macros}
\ifx\bbl@opt@safe\@empty\else
  \def\@newl@bel#1#2#3{%
   {\@safe@activestrue
    \bbl@ifunset{#1@#2}%
       \relax
       {\gdef\@multiplelabels{%
          \@latex@warning@no@line{There were multiply-defined labels}}%
        \@latex@warning@no@line{Label `#2' multiply defined}}%
    \global\@namedef{#1@#2}{#3}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\@testdef}
%    An internal \LaTeX\ macro used to test if the labels that have
%    been written on the |.aux| file have changed.  It is called by
%    the |\enddocument| macro. This macro needs to be completely
%    rewritten, using |\meaning|. The reason for this is that in some
%    cases the expansion of |\#1@#2| contains the same characters as
%    the |#3|; but the character codes differ. Therefore \LaTeX\ keeps
%    reporting that the labels may have changed.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \CheckCommand*\@testdef[3]{%
    \def\reserved@a{#3}%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname#1@#2\endcsname\reserved@a
    \else
      \@tempswatrue
    \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now that we made sure that |\@testdef| still has the same
%    definition we can rewrite it. First we make the shorthands
%    `safe'.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \def\@testdef#1#2#3{%
    \@safe@activestrue
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then we use |\bbl@tempa| as an `alias' for the macro that
%    contains the label which is being checked.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \expandafter\let\expandafter\bbl@tempa\csname #1@#2\endcsname
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then we define |\bbl@tempb| just as |\@newl@bel| does it.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \def\bbl@tempb{#3}%
    \@safe@activesfalse
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When the label is defined we replace the definition of
%    |\bbl@tempa| by its meaning.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \ifx\bbl@tempa\relax
    \else
      \edef\bbl@tempa{\expandafter\strip@prefix\meaning\bbl@tempa}%
    \fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We do the same for |\bbl@tempb|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \edef\bbl@tempb{\expandafter\strip@prefix\meaning\bbl@tempb}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    If the label didn't change, |\bbl@tempa| and |\bbl@tempb| should
%    be identical macros.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \ifx\bbl@tempa\bbl@tempb
    \else
      \@tempswatrue
    \fi}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\ref}
%  \begin{macro}{\pageref}
%    The same holds for the macro |\ref| that references a label
%    and |\pageref| to reference a page. So we redefine |\ref| and
%    |\pageref|. While we change these macros, we make them robust as
%    well (if they weren't already) to prevent problems if they should
%    become expanded at the wrong moment.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@xin@{R}\bbl@opt@safe
\ifin@
  \bbl@redefinerobust\ref#1{%
    \@safe@activestrue\org@ref{#1}\@safe@activesfalse}
  \bbl@redefinerobust\pageref#1{%
    \@safe@activestrue\org@pageref{#1}\@safe@activesfalse}
\else
  \let\org@ref\ref
  \let\org@pageref\pageref
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\@citex}
%    The macro used to cite from a bibliography, |\cite|, uses an
%    internal macro, |\@citex|.
%    It is this internal macro that picks up the argument(s),
%    so we redefine this internal macro and leave |\cite| alone. The
%    first argument is used for typesetting, so the shorthands need
%    only be deactivated in the second argument.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@xin@{B}\bbl@opt@safe
\ifin@
  \bbl@redefine\@citex[#1]#2{%
    \@safe@activestrue\edef\@tempa{#2}\@safe@activesfalse
    \org@@citex[#1]{\@tempa}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Unfortunately, the packages \pkg{natbib} and \pkg{cite} need a
%    different definition of |\@citex|...
%    To begin with, \pkg{natbib} has a definition for |\@citex| with
%    \emph{three} arguments... We only know that a package is loaded
%    when |\begin{document}| is executed, so we need to postpone the
%    different redefinition.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \AtBeginDocument{%
    \@ifpackageloaded{natbib}{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Notice that we use |\def| here instead of |\bbl@redefine| because
%    |\org@@citex| is already defined and we don't want to overwrite
%    that definition (it would result in parameter stack overflow
%    because of a circular definition).
%
%   (Recent versions of natbib change dynamically |\@citex|, so PR4087
%     doesn't seem fixable in a simple way. Just load natbib before.)
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \def\@citex[#1][#2]#3{%
      \@safe@activestrue\edef\@tempa{#3}\@safe@activesfalse
      \org@@citex[#1][#2]{\@tempa}}%
    }{}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The package \pkg{cite} has a definition of |\@citex| where the
%    shorthands need to be turned off in both arguments.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \AtBeginDocument{%
    \@ifpackageloaded{cite}{%
      \def\@citex[#1]#2{%
        \@safe@activestrue\org@@citex[#1]{#2}\@safe@activesfalse}%
      }{}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\nocite}
%    The macro |\nocite| which is used to instruct BiB\TeX\ to
%    extract uncited references from the database.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@redefine\nocite#1{%
    \@safe@activestrue\org@nocite{#1}\@safe@activesfalse}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bibcite}
%    The macro that is used in the |.aux| file to define citation
%    labels. When packages such as \pkg{natbib} or \pkg{cite} are not
%    loaded its second argument is used to typeset the citation
%    label. In that case, this second argument can contain active
%    characters but is used in an environment where
%    |\@safe@activestrue| is in effect. This switch needs to be reset
%    inside the |\hbox| which contains the citation label. In order to
%    determine during \file{.aux} file processing which definition of
%    |\bibcite| is needed we define |\bibcite| in such a way that it
%    redefines itself with the proper definition.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@redefine\bibcite{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We call |\bbl@cite@choice| to select the proper definition for
%    |\bibcite|. This new definition is then activated.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \bbl@cite@choice
    \bibcite}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@bibcite}
%    The macro |\bbl@bibcite| holds the definition of |\bibcite|
%    needed when neither \pkg{natbib} nor \pkg{cite} is loaded.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \def\bbl@bibcite#1#2{%
    \org@bibcite{#1}{\@safe@activesfalse#2}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@cite@choice}
%    The macro |\bbl@cite@choice| determines which definition of
%    |\bibcite| is needed.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \def\bbl@cite@choice{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    First we give |\bibcite| its default definition.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \global\let\bibcite\bbl@bibcite
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then, when \pkg{natbib} is loaded we restore the original
%    definition of |\bibcite|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \@ifpackageloaded{natbib}{\global\let\bibcite\org@bibcite}{}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    For \pkg{cite} we do the same.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \@ifpackageloaded{cite}{\global\let\bibcite\org@bibcite}{}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Make sure this only happens once.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \global\let\bbl@cite@choice\relax}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When a document is run for the first time, no \file{.aux} file is
%    available, and |\bibcite| will not yet be properly defined. In
%    this case, this has to happen before the document starts.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \AtBeginDocument{\bbl@cite@choice}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\@bibitem}
%    One of the two internal \LaTeX\ macros called by |\bibitem|
%    that write the citation label on the |.aux| file.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \bbl@redefine\@bibitem#1{%
    \@safe@activestrue\org@@bibitem{#1}\@safe@activesfalse}
\else
  \let\org@nocite\nocite
  \let\org@@citex\@citex
  \let\org@bibcite\bibcite
  \let\org@@bibitem\@bibitem
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Marks}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\markright}
%    Because the output routine is asynchronous, we must
%    pass the current language attribute to the head lines, together
%    with the text that is put into them. To achieve this we need to
%    adapt the definition of |\markright| and |\markboth| somewhat.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8c}{2004/05/26}{No need to add \emph{anything} to
%    an empty mark; prevented this by checking the contents of the
%    argument}
% \changes{babel~3.8f}{2005/05/15}{Make the definition independent of
%    the original definition; expand \cs{languagename} before passing
%    it into the token registers}
% \changes{babel~3.9t}{2017/04/23}{Refactored \cs{markright} and
%    \cs{markboth}}
%
%    We check whether the argument is empty; if it is, we just make
%    sure the scratch token register is empty.  Next, we store the
%    argument to |\markright| in the scratch token register. This way
%    these commands will not be expanded later, and we make sure that
%    the text is typeset using the correct language settings. While
%    doing so, we make sure that active characters that may end up in
%    the mark are not disabled by the output routine kicking in while
%    \cs{@safe@activestrue} is in effect.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Marks}
\IfBabelLayout{sectioning}
  {\ifx\bbl@opt@headfoot\@nnil
     \g@addto@macro\@resetactivechars{%
       \set@typeset@protect
       \expandafter\select@language@x\expandafter{\bbl@main@language}%
       \let\protect\noexpand}%
   \fi}
  {\bbl@redefine\markright#1{%
     \bbl@ifblank{#1}%
       {\org@markright{}}%
       {\toks@{#1}%
        \bbl@exp{%
          \\\org@markright{\\\protect\\\foreignlanguage{\languagename}%
            {\\\protect\\\bbl@restore@actives\the\toks@}}}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\markboth}
%  \begin{macro}{\@mkboth}
%    The definition of |\markboth| is equivalent to that of
%    |\markright|, except that we need two token registers. The
%    documentclasses \cls{report} and \cls{book} define and set the
%    headings for the page. While doing so they also store a copy of
%    |\markboth| in |\@mkboth|. Therefore we need to check whether
%    |\@mkboth| has already been set. If so we neeed to do that again
%    with the new definition of |\markboth|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8c}{2004/05/26}{No need to add \emph{anything} to
%    an empty mark, prevented this by checking the contents of the
%    arguments}
% \changes{babel~3.8f}{2005/05/15}{Make the definition independent of
%    the original definition; expand \cs{languagename} before passing
%    it into the token registers}
% \changes{babel~3.8j}{2008/03/21}{Added setting of \cs{@mkboth} (PR
%    3826)}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
   \ifx\@mkboth\markboth
     \def\bbl@tempc{\let\@mkboth\markboth}
   \else
     \def\bbl@tempc{}
   \fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now we can start the new definition of |\markboth|
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
   \bbl@redefine\markboth#1#2{%
     \protected@edef\bbl@tempb##1{%
       \protect\foreignlanguage
       {\languagename}{\protect\bbl@restore@actives##1}}%
     \bbl@ifblank{#1}%
       {\toks@{}}%
       {\toks@\expandafter{\bbl@tempb{#1}}}%
     \bbl@ifblank{#2}%
       {\@temptokena{}}%
       {\@temptokena\expandafter{\bbl@tempb{#2}}}%
     \bbl@exp{\\\org@markboth{\the\toks@}{\the\@temptokena}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    and copy it to |\@mkboth| if necessary.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
   \bbl@tempc}  % end \IfBabelLayout
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Preventing clashes with other packages}
%
% \subsubsection{\pkg{ifthen}}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\ifthenelse}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/07}{Redefine only if `ref' is `safe'}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/01/03}{Moved to babel.def}
%
%    Sometimes a document writer wants to create a special effect
%    depending on the page a certain fragment of text appears on. This
%    can be achieved by the following piece of code:
%\begin{verbatim}
%    \ifthenelse{\isodd{\pageref{some:label}}}
%               {code for odd pages}
%               {code for even pages}
%\end{verbatim}
%    In order for this to work the argument of |\isodd| needs to be
%    fully expandable. With the above redefinition of |\pageref| it is
%    not in the case of this example. To overcome that, we add some
%    code to the definition of |\ifthenelse| to make things work.
%
%    The first thing we need to do is check if the package
%    \pkg{ifthen} is loaded. This should be done at |\begin{document}|
%    time.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Preventing clashes with other packages}
\bbl@xin@{R}\bbl@opt@safe
\ifin@
  \AtBeginDocument{%
    \@ifpackageloaded{ifthen}{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then we can redefine |\ifthenelse|:
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/22}{\cs{ref} is also taken into account}
% \changes{babel~3.9n}{2015/12/14}{Don't use generic temp
%    macros. babel/4441}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      \bbl@redefine@long\ifthenelse#1#2#3{%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We want to revert the definition of |\pageref| and |\ref| to
%    their original definition for the first argument of |\ifthenelse|,
%    so we first need to store their current meanings.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
        \let\bbl@temp@pref\pageref
        \let\pageref\org@pageref
        \let\bbl@temp@ref\ref
        \let\ref\org@ref
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then we can set the |\@safe@actives| switch and call the original
%    |\ifthenelse|. In order to be able to use shorthands in the
%    second and third arguments of |\ifthenelse| the resetting of the
%    switch \emph{and} the definition of |\pageref| happens inside
%    those arguments.  When the package wasn't loaded we do nothing.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
        \@safe@activestrue
        \org@ifthenelse{#1}%
          {\let\pageref\bbl@temp@pref
           \let\ref\bbl@temp@ref
           \@safe@activesfalse
           #2}%
          {\let\pageref\bbl@temp@pref
           \let\ref\bbl@temp@ref
           \@safe@activesfalse
           #3}%
        }%
      }{}%
    }
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsubsection{\pkg{varioref}}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\@@vpageref}
%  \begin{macro}{\vrefpagenum}
%  \begin{macro}{\Ref}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8g}{2005/05/21}{We also need to adapt \cs{Ref}
%    which needs to be able to uppercase the first letter of the
%    expansion of \cs{ref}}
%
%    When the package varioref is in use we need to modify its
%    internal command |\@@vpageref| in order to prevent problems when
%    an active character ends up in the argument of |\vref|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \AtBeginDocument{%
    \@ifpackageloaded{varioref}{%
      \bbl@redefine\@@vpageref#1[#2]#3{%
        \@safe@activestrue
        \org@@@vpageref{#1}[#2]{#3}%
        \@safe@activesfalse}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The same needs to happen for |\vrefpagenum|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      \bbl@redefine\vrefpagenum#1#2{%
        \@safe@activestrue
        \org@vrefpagenum{#1}{#2}%
        \@safe@activesfalse}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The package \pkg{varioref} defines |\Ref| to be a robust command
%    wich uppercases the first character of the reference text. In
%    order to be able to do that it needs to access the exandable form
%    of |\ref|. So we employ a little trick here. We redefine the
%    (internal) command \verb*|\Ref | to call |\org@ref| instead of
%    |\ref|. The disadvantgage of this solution is that whenever the
%    derfinition of |\Ref| changes, this definition needs to be updated
%    as well.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      \expandafter\def\csname Ref \endcsname#1{%
        \protected@edef\@tempa{\org@ref{#1}}\expandafter\MakeUppercase\@tempa}
      }{}%
    }
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsubsection{\pkg{hhline}}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\hhline}
%    Delaying the activation of the shorthand characters has introduced
%    a problem with the \pkg{hhline} package. The reason is that it
%    uses the `:' character which is made active by the french support
%    in \babel. Therefore we need to \emph{reload} the package when
%    the `:' is an active character.
%
%    So at |\begin{document}| we check whether \pkg{hhline} is loaded.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AtEndOfPackage{%
  \AtBeginDocument{%
    \@ifpackageloaded{hhline}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then we check whether the expansion of |\normal@char:| is not
%    equal to |\relax|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8b}{2004/04/19}{added \cs{string} to prevent
%    unwanted expansion of the colon}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      {\expandafter\ifx\csname normal@char\string:\endcsname\relax
       \else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    In that case we simply reload the package. Note that this happens
%    \emph{after} the category code of the @-sign has been changed to
%    other, so we need to temporarily change it to letter again.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
         \makeatletter
         \def\@currname{hhline}\input{hhline.sty}\makeatother
       \fi}%
      {}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsubsection{\pkg{hyperref}}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\pdfstringdefDisableCommands}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8j}{2008/03/16}{Inform \pkg{hyperref} to use
%    shorthands at system level (PR4006)}
%
%    A number of interworking problems between \pkg{babel} and
%    \pkg{hyperref} are tackled by \pkg{hyperref} itself. The
%    following code was introduced to prevent some annoying warnings
%    but it broke bookmarks. This was quickly fixed in \pkg{hyperref},
%    which essentially made it no-op. However, it will not removed for
%    the moment because \pkg{hyperref} is expecting it.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AtBeginDocument{%
  \ifx\pdfstringdefDisableCommands\@undefined\else
    \pdfstringdefDisableCommands{\languageshorthands{system}}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsubsection{\pkg{fancyhdr}}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\FOREIGNLANGUAGE}
%    The package \pkg{fancyhdr} treats the running head and fout lines
%    somewhat differently as the standard classes. A symptom of this is
%    that the command |\foreignlanguage| which \babel\ adds to the
%    marks can end up inside the argument of |\MakeUppercase|. To
%    prevent unexpected results we need to define |\FOREIGNLANGUAGE|
%    here.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\DeclareRobustCommand{\FOREIGNLANGUAGE}[1]{%
  \lowercase{\foreignlanguage{#1}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\substitutefontfamily}
%    The command |\substitutefontfamily| creates an
%    \file{.fd} file on the fly. The first argument is an encoding
%    mnemonic, the second and third arguments are font family names.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\substitutefontfamily#1#2#3{%
  \lowercase{\immediate\openout15=#1#2.fd\relax}%
  \immediate\write15{%
    \string\ProvidesFile{#1#2.fd}%
    [\the\year/\two@digits{\the\month}/\two@digits{\the\day}
     \space generated font description file]^^J
    \string\DeclareFontFamily{#1}{#2}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{m}{n}{<->ssub * #3/m/n}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{m}{it}{<->ssub * #3/m/it}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{m}{sl}{<->ssub * #3/m/sl}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{m}{sc}{<->ssub * #3/m/sc}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{b}{n}{<->ssub * #3/bx/n}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{b}{it}{<->ssub * #3/bx/it}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{b}{sl}{<->ssub * #3/bx/sl}{}^^J
    \string\DeclareFontShape{#1}{#2}{b}{sc}{<->ssub * #3/bx/sc}{}^^J
    }%
  \closeout15
  }
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    This command should only be used in the preamble of a document.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@onlypreamble\substitutefontfamily
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Encoding and fonts}
%
%  Because documents may use non-ASCII font encodings, we make sure
%  that the logos of \TeX\ and \LaTeX\ always come out in the right
%  encoding. There is a list of non-ASCII encodings. Unfortunately,
%  \textsf{fontenc} deletes its package options, so we must guess
%  which encodings has been loaded by traversing |\@filelist| to
%  search for \m{enc}|enc.def|. If a non-ASCII has been loaded, we
%  define versions of |\TeX| and |\LaTeX| for them using
%  |\ensureascii|. The default ASCII encoding is set, too (in reverse
%  order): the ``main'' encoding (when the document begins), the last
%  loaded, or |OT1|.
%
%  \begin{macro}{\ensureascii}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/02/14}{Macro added, to replace
%    \cs{textlatin} and friends}
% \changes{babel~3.9j}{2014/03/17}{Moved misplaced code - it should be
%    executed only with LaTeX}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Encoding and fonts}
\newcommand\BabelNonASCII{LGR,X2,OT2,OT3,OT6,LHE,LWN,LMA,LMC,LMS,LMU,}
\let\org@TeX\TeX
\let\org@LaTeX\LaTeX
\let\ensureascii\@firstofone
\AtBeginDocument{%
  \in@false
  \bbl@foreach\BabelNonASCII{% is there a non-ascii enc?
    \ifin@\else
      \lowercase{\bbl@xin@{,#1enc.def,}{,\@filelist,}}%
    \fi}%
  \ifin@ % if a non-ascii has been loaded
    \def\ensureascii#1{{\fontencoding{OT1}\selectfont#1}}%
    \DeclareTextCommandDefault{\TeX}{\org@TeX}%
    \DeclareTextCommandDefault{\LaTeX}{\org@LaTeX}%
    \def\bbl@tempb#1\@@{\uppercase{\bbl@tempc#1}ENC.DEF\@empty\@@}%
    \def\bbl@tempc#1ENC.DEF#2\@@{%
      \ifx\@empty#2\else
        \bbl@ifunset{T@#1}%
          {}%
          {\bbl@xin@{,#1,}{,\BabelNonASCII,}%
           \ifin@
             \DeclareTextCommand{\TeX}{#1}{\ensureascii{\org@TeX}}%
             \DeclareTextCommand{\LaTeX}{#1}{\ensureascii{\org@LaTeX}}%
           \else
             \def\ensureascii##1{{\fontencoding{#1}\selectfont##1}}%
           \fi}%
      \fi}%
    \bbl@foreach\@filelist{\bbl@tempb#1\@@}%  TODO - \@@ de mas??
    \bbl@xin@{,\cf@encoding,}{,\BabelNonASCII,}%
    \ifin@\else
      \edef\ensureascii#1{{%
        \noexpand\fontencoding{\cf@encoding}\noexpand\selectfont#1}}%
    \fi
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  Now comes the old deprecated stuff (with a little change in 3.9l,
%  for \textsf{fontspec}).  The first thing we need to do is to
%  determine, at |\begin{document}|, which latin fontencoding to use.
%
%  \begin{macro}{\latinencoding}
%    When text is being typeset in an encoding other than `latin'
%    (\texttt{OT1} or \texttt{T1}), it would be nice to still have
%    Roman numerals come out in the Latin encoding.
%    So we first assume that the current encoding at the end
%    of processing the package is the Latin encoding.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AtEndOfPackage{\edef\latinencoding{\cf@encoding}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    But this might be overruled with a later loading of the package
%    \pkg{fontenc}. Therefore we check at the execution of
%    |\begin{document}| whether it was loaded with the \Lopt{T1}
%    option. The normal way to do this (using |\@ifpackageloaded|) is
%    disabled for this package. Now we have to revert to parsing the
%    internal macro |\@filelist| which contains all the filenames
%    loaded.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9l}{2014/08/02}{fontspec used to set
%    \cs{latinencoding} to EUx, but now it doesn't. So, it's done
%    here.}
% \changes{babel~3.9o}{2016/01/27}{With fontspec, first check if
%   \cs{UTFencname} exists.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AtBeginDocument{%
  \@ifpackageloaded{fontspec}%
    {\xdef\latinencoding{%
       \ifx\UTFencname\@undefined
         EU\ifcase\bbl@engine\or2\or1\fi
       \else
         \UTFencname
       \fi}}%
    {\gdef\latinencoding{OT1}%
     \ifx\cf@encoding\bbl@t@one
       \xdef\latinencoding{\bbl@t@one}%
     \else
       \@ifl@aded{def}{t1enc}{\xdef\latinencoding{\bbl@t@one}}{}%
     \fi}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\latintext}
%    Then we can define the command |\latintext| which is a
%    declarative switch to a latin font-encoding. Usage of this macro
%    is deprecated.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\DeclareRobustCommand{\latintext}{%
  \fontencoding{\latinencoding}\selectfont
  \def\encodingdefault{\latinencoding}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\textlatin}
%    This command takes an argument which is then typeset using the
%    requested font encoding. In order to avoid many encoding switches
%    it operates in a local scope.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\@undefined\DeclareTextFontCommand
  \DeclareRobustCommand{\textlatin}[1]{\leavevmode{\latintext #1}}
\else
  \DeclareTextFontCommand{\textlatin}{\latintext}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Basic bidi support}
%
% \textbf{Work in progress.} This code is currently placed here for
% practical reasons.
%
% It is loosely based on |rlbabel.def|, but most of it has been
% developed from scratch. This \babel{} module (by Johannes Braams and
% Boris Lavva) has served the purpose of typesetting R documents for
% two decades, and despite its flaws I think it is still a good starting
% point (some parts have been copied here almost verbatim), partly
% thanks to its simplicity. I've also looked at \textsc{arabi} (by
% Youssef Jabri), which is compatible with \babel{}.
%
% There are two ways of modifying macros to make them “bidi”, namely,
% by patching the internal low level macros (which is what I have done
% with lists, columns, counters, tocs, much like |rlbabel| did), and
% by introducing a “middle layer” just below the user interface
% (sectioning, footnotes).
%
%    \begin{itemize}
%    \item pdftex provides a minimal support for bidi text, and it
%      must be done by hand. Vertical typesetting is not possible.
%    \item \xetex{} is somewhat better, thanks to its font engine
%      (even if not always reliable) and a few additional tools. However,
%      very little is done at the paragraph level. Another challenging
%      problem is text direction does not honour \TeX{} grouping.
%    \item \luatex{} can provide the most complete solution, as we can
%      manipulate almost freely the node list, the generated lines,
%      and so on, but bidi text does not work out of the box and some
%      development is necessary. It also provides tools to properly
%      set left-to-right and right-to-left page layouts. As Lua\TeX-ja
%      shows, vertical typesetting is posible, too. Its main drawback
%      is font handling is often considered to be less mature than
%      \xetex{}, mainly in Indic scripts (but there are steps to make
%      HarfBuzz, the \xetex{} font engine, available in \luatex{}; see
%      <https://github.com/tatzetwerk/luatex-harfbuzz>).
%    \end{itemize}
%
% \changes{3.15}{2017/10/30}{Use an attribute instead of tex language
%    (reserved for hyphenation).}
% \changes{3.15}{2017/10/30}{Store direction in @wdir@<lang>.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Basic (internal) bidi support}
\def\bbl@alscripts{,Arabic,Syriac,Thaana,}
\def\bbl@rscripts{%
  ,Imperial Aramaic,Avestan,Cypriot,Hatran,Hebrew,%
  Old Hungarian,Old Hungarian,Lydian,Mandaean,Manichaean,%
  Manichaean,Meroitic Cursive,Meroitic,Old North Arabian,%
  Nabataean,N'Ko,Orkhon,Palmyrene,Inscriptional Pahlavi,%
  Psalter Pahlavi,Phoenician,Inscriptional Parthian,Samaritan,%
  Old South Arabian,}%
\def\bbl@provide@dirs#1{%
  \bbl@xin@{\csname bbl@sname@#1\endcsname}{\bbl@alscripts\bbl@rscripts}%
  \ifin@
    \global\bbl@csarg\chardef{wdir@#1}\@ne
    \bbl@xin@{\csname bbl@sname@#1\endcsname}{\bbl@alscripts}%
    \ifin@
      \global\bbl@csarg\chardef{wdir@#1}\tw@  % useless in xetex
    \fi
  \else
    \global\bbl@csarg\chardef{wdir@#1}\z@
  \fi}
\def\bbl@switchdir{%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@lsys@\languagename}{\bbl@provide@lsys{\languagename}}{}%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@wdir@\languagename}{\bbl@provide@dirs{\languagename}}{}%
  \bbl@exp{\\\bbl@setdirs\bbl@cs{wdir@\languagename}}}
\def\bbl@setdirs#1{% TODO - math
  \ifcase\bbl@select@type % TODO - strictly, not the right test
    \bbl@bodydir{#1}%
    \bbl@pardir{#1}%
  \fi
  \bbl@textdir{#1}}
\ifodd\bbl@engine  % luatex=1
  \AddBabelHook{babel-bidi}{afterextras}{\bbl@switchdir}
  \DisableBabelHook{babel-bidi}
  \chardef\bbl@thepardir\z@
  \def\bbl@getluadir#1{%
    \directlua{
      if tex.#1dir == 'TLT' then
        tex.sprint('0')
      elseif tex.#1dir == 'TRT' then
        tex.sprint('1')
      end}}
  \def\bbl@setluadir#1#2#3{% 1=text/par.. 2=\textdir.. 3=0 lr/1 rl
    \ifcase#3\relax
      \ifcase\bbl@getluadir{#1}\relax\else
        #2 TLT\relax
      \fi
    \else
      \ifcase\bbl@getluadir{#1}\relax
        #2 TRT\relax
      \fi
    \fi}
  \def\bbl@textdir#1{%
    \bbl@setluadir{text}\textdir{#1}% TODO - ?\linedir
    \setattribute\bbl@attr@dir{\numexpr\bbl@thepardir*3+#1}}
  \def\bbl@pardir#1{\bbl@setluadir{par}\pardir{#1}%
    \chardef\bbl@thepardir#1\relax}
  \def\bbl@bodydir{\bbl@setluadir{body}\bodydir}
  \def\bbl@pagedir{\bbl@setluadir{page}\pagedir}
  \def\bbl@dirparastext{\pardir\the\textdir\relax}%   %%%%
\else % pdftex=0, xetex=2
  \AddBabelHook{babel-bidi}{afterextras}{\bbl@switchdir}
  \DisableBabelHook{babel-bidi}
  \newcount\bbl@dirlevel
  \chardef\bbl@thetextdir\z@
  \chardef\bbl@thepardir\z@
  \def\bbl@textdir#1{%
    \ifcase#1\relax
       \chardef\bbl@thetextdir\z@
       \bbl@textdir@i\beginL\endL
     \else
       \chardef\bbl@thetextdir\@ne
       \bbl@textdir@i\beginR\endR
    \fi}
  \def\bbl@textdir@i#1#2{%
    \ifhmode
      \ifnum\currentgrouplevel>\z@
        \ifnum\currentgrouplevel=\bbl@dirlevel
          \bbl@error{Multiple bidi settings inside a group}%
            {I'll insert a new group, but expect wrong results.}%
          \bgroup\aftergroup#2\aftergroup\egroup
        \else
          \ifcase\currentgrouptype\or % 0 bottom
            \aftergroup#2% 1 simple {}
          \or
            \bgroup\aftergroup#2\aftergroup\egroup % 2 hbox
          \or
            \bgroup\aftergroup#2\aftergroup\egroup % 3 adj hbox
          \or\or\or % vbox vtop align
          \or
            \bgroup\aftergroup#2\aftergroup\egroup % 7 noalign
          \or\or\or\or\or\or % output math disc insert vcent mathchoice
          \or
            \aftergroup#2% 14 \begingroup
          \else
            \bgroup\aftergroup#2\aftergroup\egroup % 15 adj
          \fi
        \fi
        \bbl@dirlevel\currentgrouplevel
      \fi
      #1%
    \fi}
  \def\bbl@pardir#1{\chardef\bbl@thepardir#1\relax}
  \let\bbl@bodydir\@gobble
  \let\bbl@pagedir\@gobble
  \def\bbl@dirparastext{\chardef\bbl@thepardir\bbl@thetextdir}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The following command is executed only if there is a right-to-left
% script (once). It activates the |\everypar| hack for \xetex, to
% properly handle the par direction. Note text and par dirs are
% decoupled to some extent (although not completely).
%
% \changes{3.16}{2018/01/02}{Fix - the direction prevented the removal
%   of the indent to be re-placed}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \def\bbl@xebidipar{%
    \let\bbl@xebidipar\relax
    \TeXXeTstate\@ne
    \def\bbl@xeeverypar{%
      \ifcase\bbl@thepardir
        \ifcase\bbl@thetextdir\else\beginR\fi
      \else
        {\setbox\z@\lastbox\beginR\box\z@}%
      \fi}%
    \let\bbl@severypar\everypar
    \newtoks\everypar
    \everypar=\bbl@severypar
    \bbl@severypar{\bbl@xeeverypar\the\everypar}}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% A tool for weak L (mainly digits).
%
% \changes{3.16}{2018/01/02}{New macro \cs{babelsublr}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \DeclareRobustCommand\babelsublr[1]{\leavevmode{\bbl@textdir\z@#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Local Language Configuration}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\loadlocalcfg}
%    At some sites it may be necessary to add site-specific actions to
%    a language definition file. This can be done by creating a file
%    with the same name as the language definition file, but with the
%    extension \file{.cfg}. For instance the file \file{norsk.cfg}
%    will be loaded when the language definition file \file{norsk.ldf}
%    is loaded.
%
%    For plain-based formats we don't want to override the definition
%    of |\loadlocalcfg| from \file{plain.def}.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Local Language Configuration}
\ifx\loadlocalcfg\@undefined
  \@ifpackagewith{babel}{noconfigs}%
    {\let\loadlocalcfg\@gobble}%
    {\def\loadlocalcfg#1{%
      \InputIfFileExists{#1.cfg}%
        {\typeout{*************************************^^J%
                       * Local config file #1.cfg used^^J%
                       *}}%
        \@empty}}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Just to be compatible with \LaTeX$\:$2.09 we add a few more lines
%    of code:
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\@unexpandable@protect\@undefined
  \def\@unexpandable@protect{\noexpand\protect\noexpand}
  \long\def\protected@write#1#2#3{%
    \begingroup
      \let\thepage\relax
      #2%
      \let\protect\@unexpandable@protect
      \edef\reserved@a{\write#1{#3}}%
      \reserved@a
    \endgroup
    \if@nobreak\ifvmode\nobreak\fi\fi}
\fi
%</core>
%<*kernel>
%    \end{macrocode}%
%    \end{macro}
%
% \section{Multiple languages (\texttt{switch.def)}}
%
%    Plain \TeX\ version~3.0 provides the primitive |\language| that
%    is used to store the current language. When used with a pre-3.0
%    version this function has to be implemented by allocating a
%    counter.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
<@Make sure ProvidesFile is defined@>
\ProvidesFile{switch.def}[<@date@> <@version@> Babel switching mechanism]
<@Load macros for plain if not LaTeX@>
<@Define core switching macros@>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\adddialect}
%    The macro |\adddialect| can be used to add the name of a dialect
%    or variant language, for which an already defined hyphenation
%    table can be used.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@version{<@version@>}
\def\bbl@date{<@date@>}
\def\adddialect#1#2{%
  \global\chardef#1#2\relax
  \bbl@usehooks{adddialect}{{#1}{#2}}%
  \wlog{\string#1 = a dialect from \string\language#2}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/07}{Added macro}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/01/23}{New macro to normalize
%    a macro (eg, \cs{languagename}) to lowercase if necessary}
%
%    |\bbl@iflanguage| executes code only if the language |l@|
%    exists. Otherwise raises and error.
%
%    The argument of |\bbl@fixname| has to be a macro name, as it may get
%    ``fixed'' if casing (lc/uc) is wrong. It's intented to fix a
%    long-standing bug when |\foreignlanguage| and the like appear in
%    a |\MakeXXXcase|. However, a lowercase form is not imposed to
%    improve backward compatibility (perhaps you defined a language
%    named |MYLANG|, but unfortunately mixed case names cannot be
%    trapped). Note |l@| is encapsulated, so that its case does not
%    change.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@fixname#1{%
  \begingroup
    \def\bbl@tempe{l@}%
    \edef\bbl@tempd{\noexpand\@ifundefined{\noexpand\bbl@tempe#1}}%
    \bbl@tempd
      {\lowercase\expandafter{\bbl@tempd}%
         {\uppercase\expandafter{\bbl@tempd}%
           \@empty
           {\edef\bbl@tempd{\def\noexpand#1{#1}}%
            \uppercase\expandafter{\bbl@tempd}}}%
         {\edef\bbl@tempd{\def\noexpand#1{#1}}%
          \lowercase\expandafter{\bbl@tempd}}}%
      \@empty
    \edef\bbl@tempd{\endgroup\def\noexpand#1{#1}}%
  \bbl@tempd}
\def\bbl@iflanguage#1{%
  \@ifundefined{l@#1}{\@nolanerr{#1}\@gobble}\@firstofone}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\iflanguage}
%    Users might want to test (in a private package for instance)
%    which language is currently active. For this we provide a test
%    macro, |\iflanguage|, that has three arguments.  It checks
%    whether the first argument is a known language. If so, it
%    compares the first argument with the value of |\language|. Then,
%    depending on the result of the comparison, it executes either the
%    second or the third argument.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\iflanguage#1{%
  \bbl@iflanguage{#1}{%
    \ifnum\csname l@#1\endcsname=\language
      \expandafter\@firstoftwo
    \else
      \expandafter\@secondoftwo
    \fi}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% \subsection{Selecting the language}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\selectlanguage}
%    The macro |\selectlanguage| checks whether the language is
%    already defined before it performs its actual task, which is to
%    update |\language| and activate language-specific definitions.
%
%    To allow the call of |\selectlanguage| either with a control
%    sequence name or with a simple string as argument, we have to use
%    a trick to delete the optional escape character.
%
%    To convert a control sequence to a string, we use the |\string|
%    primitive.  Next we have to look at the first character of this
%    string and compare it with the escape character.  Because this
%    escape character can be changed by setting the internal integer
%    |\escapechar| to a character number, we have to compare this
%    number with the character of the string.  To do this we have to
%    use \TeX's backquote notation to specify the character as a
%    number.
%
%    If the first character of the |\string|'ed argument is the
%    current escape character, the comparison has stripped this
%    character and the rest in the `then' part consists of the rest of
%    the control sequence name.  Otherwise we know that either the
%    argument is not a control sequence or |\escapechar| is set to a
%    value outside of the character range~$0$--$255$.
%
%    If the user gives an empty argument, we provide a default
%    argument for |\string|.  This argument should expand to nothing.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/11/16}{\cs{bbl@select@type} keep tracks of
%    the selection method: 0 is select, 1 is foreign}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\bbl@select@type\z@
\edef\selectlanguage{%
  \noexpand\protect
  \expandafter\noexpand\csname selectlanguage \endcsname}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Because the command |\selectlanguage| could be used in a moving
%    argument it expands to \verb*=\protect\selectlanguage =.
%    Therefore, we have to make sure that a macro |\protect| exists.
%    If it doesn't it is |\let| to |\relax|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\@undefined\protect\let\protect\relax\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    As \LaTeX$\:$2.09 writes to files \textit{expanded} whereas
%    \LaTeXe\ takes care \textit{not} to expand the arguments of
%    |\write| statements we need to be a bit clever about the way we
%    add information to \file{.aux} files. Therefore we introduce the
%    macro |\xstring| which should expand to the right amount of
%    |\string|'s.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\documentclass\@undefined
  \def\xstring{\string\string\string}
\else
  \let\xstring\string
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \end{macro}
%
%    Since version 3.5 \babel\ writes entries to the auxiliary files in
%    order to typeset table of contents etc. in the correct language
%    environment.
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@pop@language}
%    \emph{But} when the language change happens \emph{inside} a group
%    the end of the group doesn't write anything to the auxiliary
%    files. Therefore we need \TeX's |aftergroup| mechanism to help
%    us. The command |\aftergroup| stores the token immediately
%    following it to be executed when the current group is closed. So
%    we define a temporary control sequence |\bbl@pop@language| to be
%    executed at the end of the group. It calls |\bbl@set@language|
%    with the name of the current language as its argument.
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@language@stack}
%    The previous solution works for one level of nesting groups, but
%    as soon as more levels are used it is no longer adequate. For
%    that case we need to keep track of the nested languages using a
%    stack mechanism. This stack is called |\bbl@language@stack| and
%    initially empty.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@language@stack{}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When using a stack we need a mechanism to push an element on the
%    stack and to retrieve the information afterwards.
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@push@language}
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@pop@language}
%    The stack is simply a list of languagenames, separated with a `+'
%    sign; the push function can be simple:
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@push@language{%
  \xdef\bbl@language@stack{\languagename+\bbl@language@stack}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Retrieving information from the stack is a little bit less simple, as
% we need to remove the element from the stack while storing it in the
% macro |\languagename|. For this we first define a helper function.
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@pop@lang}
%    This macro stores its first element (which is delimited by the
%    `+'-sign) in |\languagename| and stores the rest of the string
%    (delimited by `-') in its third argument.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@pop@lang#1+#2-#3{%
  \edef\languagename{#1}\xdef#3{#2}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%    The reason for the somewhat weird arrangement of arguments to the
%    helper function is the fact it is called in the following way.
%    This means that before |\bbl@pop@lang| is executed \TeX\ first
%    \emph{expands} the stack, stored in |\bbl@language@stack|. The
%    result of that is that the argument string of |\bbl@pop@lang|
%    contains one or more language names, each followed by a `+'-sign
%    (zero language names won't occur as this macro will only be
%    called after something has been pushed on the stack) followed by
%    the `-'-sign and finally the reference to the stack.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\bbl@ifrestoring\@secondoftwo
\def\bbl@pop@language{%
  \expandafter\bbl@pop@lang\bbl@language@stack-\bbl@language@stack
  \let\bbl@ifrestoring\@firstoftwo
  \expandafter\bbl@set@language\expandafter{\languagename}%
  \let\bbl@ifrestoring\@secondoftwo}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Once the name of the previous language is retrieved from the stack,
%    it is fed to |\bbl@set@language| to do the actual work of
%    switching everything that needs switching.
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\expandafter\def\csname selectlanguage \endcsname#1{%
  \ifnum\bbl@hymapsel=\@cclv\let\bbl@hymapsel\tw@\fi
  \bbl@push@language
  \aftergroup\bbl@pop@language
  \bbl@set@language{#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@set@language}
%
%    The macro |\bbl@set@language| takes care of switching the
%    language environment \emph{and} of writing entries on the
%    auxiliary files.  For historial reasons, language names can be
%    either |language| of |\language|. To catch either form a trick is
%    used, but unfortunately as a side effect the catcodes of letters
%    in |\languagename| are not well defined. The list of auxiliary
%    files can be extended by redefining |\BabelContentsFiles|, but
%    make sure they are loaded inside a group (as |aux|, |toc|,
%    |lof|, and |lot| do) or the last language of the document will
%    remain active afterwards.
%
%    We also write a command to change the current language in the
%    auxiliary files.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/09}{Added hook}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/11/07}{Use a loop for contents files, with
%    the help of \cs{BabelContentsFiles}}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/03/08}{Don't write to aux if language is
%    unknown}
% \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/11/20}{Error with a more helpful text }
% \changes{babel~3.16}{2018/01/02}{New mechanism to pass the language
% to aux, toc, etc.}
% \changes{babel~3.22}{2018/06/05}{Unknown languages in aux files do
%   not raise an error any more (only a warning).}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\BabelContentsFiles{toc,lof,lot}
\def\bbl@set@language#1{%
  \edef\languagename{%
    \ifnum\escapechar=\expandafter`\string#1\@empty
    \else\string#1\@empty\fi}%
  \select@language{\languagename}%
  \expandafter\ifx\csname date\languagename\endcsname\relax\else
    \if@filesw
      \protected@write\@auxout{}{\string\babel@aux{\languagename}{}}%
      \bbl@usehooks{write}{}%
    \fi
  \fi}
\def\select@language#1{%
  \ifnum\bbl@hymapsel=\@cclv\chardef\bbl@hymapsel4\relax\fi
  \edef\languagename{#1}%
  \bbl@fixname\languagename
  \bbl@iflanguage\languagename{%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname date\languagename\endcsname\relax
      \bbl@error
        {Unknown language `#1'. Either you have\\%
         misspelled its name, it has not been installed,\\%
         or you requested it in a previous run. Fix its name,\\%
         install it or just rerun the file, respectively. In\\%
         some cases, you may need to remove the aux file}%
        {You may proceed, but expect wrong results}%
    \else
      \let\bbl@select@type\z@
      \expandafter\bbl@switch\expandafter{\languagename}%
    \fi}}
\def\babel@aux#1#2{%
  \expandafter\ifx\csname date#1\endcsname\relax
    \expandafter\ifx\csname bbl@auxwarn@#1\endcsname\relax
      \@namedef{bbl@auxwarn@#1}{}%
      \bbl@warning
        {Unknown language `#1'. Very likely you\\%
         requested it in a previous run. Expect some\\%
         wrong results in this run, which should vanish\\%
         in the next one. Reported}%
    \fi
  \else
    \select@language{#1}%
    \bbl@foreach\BabelContentsFiles{%
      \@writefile{##1}{\babel@toc{#1}{#2}}}% %% TODO - ok in plain?
  \fi}
\def\babel@toc#1#2{%
  \select@language{#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% A bit of optimization. Select in heads/foots the language only if
% necessary. The real thing is in \texttt{babel.def}.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\select@language@x\select@language
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%    First, check if the user asks for a known language. If so,
%    update the value of |\language| and call |\originalTeX|
%    to bring \TeX\ in a certain pre-defined state.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8l}{2008/07/06}{Use \cs{bbl@patterns}}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/27}{Moved \cs{bbl@patterns} to the
%    correct place, after setting the extras for the current
%    language}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/01}{Created \cs{bbl@switch} with code
%    shared by \cs{select@language} and \cs{foreing@language}}
%
%    The name of the language is stored in the control sequence
%    |\languagename|.
%
%    Then we have to \emph{re}define |\originalTeX| to compensate for
%    the things that have been activated.  To save memory space for
%    the macro definition of |\originalTeX|, we construct the control
%    sequence name for the |\noextras|\langvar\ command at definition
%    time by expanding the |\csname| primitive.
%
%    Now activate the language-specific definitions. This is done by
%    constructing the names of three macros by concatenating three
%    words with the argument of |\selectlanguage|, and calling these
%    macros. \nb{What if \cs{hyphenation} was used in |extras|? Patch
%    temporarily |\set@hyphenmins| and hyphenation. It can be done in
%    hooks if necessary.}
%
%    The switching of the values of |\lefthyphenmin| and
%    |\righthyphenmin| is somewhat different. First we save their
%    current values, then we check if |\|\langvar|hyphenmins| is
%    defined. If it is not, we set default values (2 and 3), otherwise
%    the values in |\|\langvar|hyphenmins| will be used.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/01}{Adddd \cs{bbl@iflanguagename} and
%   \cs{select@language@x}, which is no-op if the language is the same}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/01/23}{\cs{select@language} sets
%   \textsc{languagename} so that it has the correct value in the aux
%   file (eg, shorthand expansion was wrong)}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/14}{Make sure the save counter is reset
%    even if \cs{originalTeX} is used in other contexts}
% \changes{babel~3.9c}{2013/04/08}{Removed an extra empty line}
% \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/11/29}{Use \cs{def} instead of
%    \cs{renewcommand} for \cs{BabelLower}}
% \changes{babel~3.9i}{2014/03/04}{Added `afterreset' hook}
% \changes{3.15}{2017/10/30}{Remove spaces inside captions and date.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newif\ifbbl@usedategroup
\def\bbl@switch#1{%
  \originalTeX
  \expandafter\def\expandafter\originalTeX\expandafter{%
    \csname noextras#1\endcsname
    \let\originalTeX\@empty
    \babel@beginsave}%
  \bbl@usehooks{afterreset}{}%
  \languageshorthands{none}%
  \ifcase\bbl@select@type
    \ifhmode
      \hskip\z@skip % trick to ignore spaces
      \csname captions#1\endcsname\relax
      \csname date#1\endcsname\relax
      \loop\ifdim\lastskip>\z@\unskip\repeat\unskip
    \else
      \csname captions#1\endcsname\relax
      \csname date#1\endcsname\relax
    \fi
  \else\ifbbl@usedategroup
    \bbl@usedategroupfalse
    \ifhmode
      \hskip\z@skip % trick to ignore spaces
      \csname date#1\endcsname\relax
      \loop\ifdim\lastskip>\z@\unskip\repeat\unskip
    \else
      \csname date#1\endcsname\relax
    \fi
  \fi\fi
  \bbl@usehooks{beforeextras}{}%
  \csname extras#1\endcsname\relax
  \bbl@usehooks{afterextras}{}%
  \ifcase\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\or
    \def\BabelLower##1##2{\lccode##1=##2\relax}%
    \ifnum\bbl@hymapsel>4\else
      \csname\languagename @bbl@hyphenmap\endcsname
    \fi
    \chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\z@
  \else
    \ifnum\bbl@hymapsel>\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\else
      \csname\languagename @bbl@hyphenmap\endcsname
    \fi
  \fi
  \global\let\bbl@hymapsel\@cclv
  \bbl@patterns{#1}%
  \babel@savevariable\lefthyphenmin
  \babel@savevariable\righthyphenmin
  \expandafter\ifx\csname #1hyphenmins\endcsname\relax
    \set@hyphenmins\tw@\thr@@\relax
  \else
    \expandafter\expandafter\expandafter\set@hyphenmins
      \csname #1hyphenmins\endcsname\relax
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{environment}{otherlanguage}
%    The \Lenv{otherlanguage} environment can be used as an
%    alternative to using the |\selectlanguage| declarative
%    command. When you are typesetting a document which mixes
%    left-to-right and right-to-left typesetting you have to use this
%    environment in order to let things work as you expect them to.
%
%    The |\ignorespaces| command is necessary to hide the environment
%    when it is entered in horizontal mode.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/31}{Removed \cs{originalTeX}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\long\def\otherlanguage#1{%
  \ifnum\bbl@hymapsel=\@cclv\let\bbl@hymapsel\thr@@\fi
  \csname selectlanguage \endcsname{#1}%
  \ignorespaces}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The |\endotherlanguage| part of the environment tries to hide
%    itself when it is called in horizontal mode.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\long\def\endotherlanguage{%
  \global\@ignoretrue\ignorespaces}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{environment}
%
%  \begin{environment}{otherlanguage*}
%    The \Lenv{otherlanguage} environment is meant to be used when a
%    large part of text from a different language needs to be typeset,
%    but without changing the translation of words such as `figure'.
%    This environment makes use of |\foreign@language|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\expandafter\def\csname otherlanguage*\endcsname#1{%
  \ifnum\bbl@hymapsel=\@cclv\chardef\bbl@hymapsel4\relax\fi
  \foreign@language{#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    At the end of the environment we need to switch off the extra
%    definitions. The grouping mechanism of the environment will take
%    care of resetting the correct hyphenation rules and ``extras''.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\expandafter\let\csname endotherlanguage*\endcsname\relax
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{environment}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\foreignlanguage}
%    The |\foreignlanguage| command is another substitute for the
%    |\selectlanguage| command. This command takes two arguments, the
%    first argument is the name of the language to use for typesetting
%    the text specified in the second argument.
%
%    Unlike |\selectlanguage| this command doesn't switch
%    \emph{everything}, it only switches the hyphenation rules and the
%    extra definitions for the language specified. It does this within
%    a group and assumes the |\extras|\langvar\ command doesn't make
%    any |\global| changes. The coding is very similar to part of
%    |\selectlanguage|.
%
%    |\bbl@beforeforeign| is a trick to fix a bug in bidi
%    texts. |\foreignlanguage| is supposed to be a `text' command, and
%    therefore it must emit a |\leavevmode|, but it does not, and
%    therefore the indent is placed on the opposite margin. For
%    backward compatibility, however, it is done only if a
%    right-to-left script is requested; otherwise, it is no-op.
%
%    (3.11) |\foreignlanguage*| is a temporary, experimental macro for
%    a few lines with a different script direction, while preserving
%    the paragraph format (thank the braces around |\par|, things like
%    |\hangindent| are not reset). Do not use it in production,
%    because its semantics and its syntax may change (and very likely
%    will, or even it could be removed altogether). Currently it
%    enters in vmode and then selects the language (which in turn sets the
%    paragraph direction).
%
%    (3.11) Also experimental are the hook |foreign| and
%    |foreign*|. With them you can redefine |\BabelText| which by
%    default does nothing. Its
%    behavior is not well defined yet. So, use it in
%    horizontal mode only if you do not want surprises.
%
%    In other words, at the beginning of a paragraph |\foreignlanguage|
%    enters into hmode with the surrounding lang, and with
%    |\foreignlanguage*| with the new lang.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/30}{Removed unnecesary \cs{noextras}
%    just before closing the group}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/31}{Moved \cs{originalTeX} to
%    \cs{foreing@language} so that it's also used in
%    \texttt{otherlanguage*}}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/24}{\cs{foreignlanguage} defined
%    similarly to \cs{selectlanguage}, protecting the whole macro}
% \changes{babel~3.11}{2017/03/04}{\cs{foreignlanguage*},
%    \cs{bbl@beforeforeign} and hooks}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\providecommand\bbl@beforeforeign{}
\edef\foreignlanguage{%
  \noexpand\protect
  \expandafter\noexpand\csname foreignlanguage \endcsname}
\expandafter\def\csname foreignlanguage \endcsname{%
  \@ifstar\bbl@foreign@s\bbl@foreign@x}
\def\bbl@foreign@x#1#2{%
  \begingroup
    \let\BabelText\@firstofone
    \bbl@beforeforeign
    \foreign@language{#1}%
    \bbl@usehooks{foreign}{}%
    \BabelText{#2}% Now in horizontal mode!
  \endgroup}
\def\bbl@foreign@s#1#2{% TODO - \shapemode, \@setpar, ?\@@par
  \begingroup
    {\par}%
    \let\BabelText\@firstofone
    \foreign@language{#1}%
    \bbl@usehooks{foreign*}{}%
    \bbl@dirparastext
    \BabelText{#2}% Still in vertical mode!
    {\par}%
  \endgroup}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\foreign@language}
%    This macro does the
%    work for |\foreignlanguage| and the \Lenv{otherlanguage*}
%    environment. First we need to store the name of the language and
%    check that it is a known language. Then it just calls
%    |bbl@switch|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/11/29}{The warning shows the language
%    actually selected (with fixed case)}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\foreign@language#1{%
  \edef\languagename{#1}%
  \bbl@fixname\languagename
  \bbl@iflanguage\languagename{%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname date\languagename\endcsname\relax
      \bbl@warning
        {Unknown language `#1'. Either you have\\%
         misspelled its name, it has not been installed,\\%
         or you requested it in a previous run. Fix its name,\\%
         install it or just rerun the file, respectively.\\%
         I'll proceed, but expect wrong results.\\%
         Reported}%
    \fi
    \let\bbl@select@type\@ne
    \expandafter\bbl@switch\expandafter{\languagename}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@patterns}
%
% \changes{babel~3.8l}{2008/07/06}{Macro added}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/08/28}{Extended to set hyphenation
%    exceptions as defined with \cs{babelhyphenation}}
% \changes{babel~3.9m}{2015/07/25}{Preset \cs{bbl@pttnlist} and
%    \cs{bbl@patterns@} to relax, for luatex.}
%
%    This macro selects the hyphenation patterns by changing the
%    \cs{language} register.  If special hyphenation patterns
%    are available specifically for the current font encoding,
%    use them instead of the default.
%
%    It also sets hyphenation exceptions, but only once, because they
%    are global (here language |\lccode|'s has been set,
%    too). |\bbl@hyphenation@| is set to relax until the very first
%    |\babelhyphenation|, so do nothing with this value. If the
%    exceptions for a language (by its number, not its name, so that
%    |:ENC| is taken into account) has been set, then use
%    |\hyphenation| with both global and language exceptions and empty
%    the latter to mark they must not be set again.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\bbl@hyphlist\@empty
\let\bbl@hyphenation@\relax
\let\bbl@pttnlist\@empty
\let\bbl@patterns@\relax
\let\bbl@hymapsel=\@cclv
\def\bbl@patterns#1{%
  \language=\expandafter\ifx\csname l@#1:\f@encoding\endcsname\relax
      \csname l@#1\endcsname
      \edef\bbl@tempa{#1}%
    \else
      \csname l@#1:\f@encoding\endcsname
      \edef\bbl@tempa{#1:\f@encoding}%
    \fi
  \@expandtwoargs\bbl@usehooks{patterns}{{#1}{\bbl@tempa}}%
  \@ifundefined{bbl@hyphenation@}{}{% Can be \relax!
    \begingroup
      \bbl@xin@{,\number\language,}{,\bbl@hyphlist}%
      \ifin@\else
        \@expandtwoargs\bbl@usehooks{hyphenation}{{#1}{\bbl@tempa}}%
        \hyphenation{%
          \bbl@hyphenation@
          \@ifundefined{bbl@hyphenation@#1}%
            \@empty
            {\space\csname bbl@hyphenation@#1\endcsname}}%
        \xdef\bbl@hyphlist{\bbl@hyphlist\number\language,}%
      \fi
    \endgroup}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{environment}{hyphenrules}
%    The environment \Lenv{hyphenrules} can be used to select
%    \emph{just} the hyphenation rules. This environment does
%    \emph{not} change |\languagename| and when the hyphenation rules
%    specified were not loaded it has no effect. Note however,
%    |\lccode|'s and font encodings are not set at all, so in most
%    cases you should use |otherlanguage*|.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8j}{2008/03/16}{Also set the hyphenmin parameters to
%    the correct value (PR3997)}
% \changes{babel~3.8l}{2008/07/06}{Use \cs{bbl@patterns}}
% \changes{3.15}{2017/10/30}{Don't set language name. Use temp macro.}
% \changes{3.15}{2018/02/14}{Fix - didn't work with polyglossia}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\hyphenrules#1{%
  \edef\bbl@tempf{#1}%
  \bbl@fixname\bbl@tempf
  \bbl@iflanguage\bbl@tempf{%
    \expandafter\bbl@patterns\expandafter{\bbl@tempf}%
    \languageshorthands{none}%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname\bbl@tempf hyphenmins\endcsname\relax
      \set@hyphenmins\tw@\thr@@\relax
    \else
      \expandafter\expandafter\expandafter\set@hyphenmins
      \csname\bbl@tempf hyphenmins\endcsname\relax
    \fi}}
\let\endhyphenrules\@empty
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{environment}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\providehyphenmins}
%    The macro |\providehyphenmins| should be used in the language
%    definition files to provide a \emph{default} setting for the
%    hyphenation parameters |\lefthyphenmin| and |\righthyphenmin|. If
%    the macro |\|\langvar|hyphenmins| is already defined this command
%    has no effect.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\providehyphenmins#1#2{%
  \expandafter\ifx\csname #1hyphenmins\endcsname\relax
    \@namedef{#1hyphenmins}{#2}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\set@hyphenmins}
%    This macro sets the values of |\lefthyphenmin| and
%    |\righthyphenmin|. It expects two values as its argument.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\set@hyphenmins#1#2{%
  \lefthyphenmin#1\relax
  \righthyphenmin#2\relax}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\ProvidesLanguage}
%    The identification code for each file is something that was
%    introduced in \LaTeXe. When the command |\ProvidesFile| does not
%    exist, a dummy definition is provided temporarily. For use in the
%    language definition file the command |\ProvidesLanguage| is
%    defined by \babel.
%
%    Depending on the format, ie, on if the former is defined, we use
%    a similar definition or not.
%
%    \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/09}{Save info about the babel
%    version in the format (switch.def) so that it can be checked
%    later if necessary}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\ProvidesFile\@undefined
  \def\ProvidesLanguage#1[#2 #3 #4]{%
    \wlog{Language: #1 #4 #3 <#2>}%
    }
\else
  \def\ProvidesLanguage#1{%
    \begingroup
      \catcode`\ 10 %
      \@makeother\/%
      \@ifnextchar[%]
        {\@provideslanguage{#1}}{\@provideslanguage{#1}[]}}
  \def\@provideslanguage#1[#2]{%
    \wlog{Language: #1 #2}%
    \expandafter\xdef\csname ver@#1.ldf\endcsname{#2}%
    \endgroup}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\LdfInit}
%    This macro is defined in two versions. The first version is to be
%    part of the `kernel' of \babel, ie. the part that is loaded in
%    the format; the second version is defined in \file{babel.def}.
%    The version in the format just checks the category code of the
%    ampersand and then loads \file{babel.def}.
%
%    The category code of the ampersand is restored and the macro
%    calls itself again with the new definition from
%    \file{babel.def}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\LdfInit{%
  \chardef\atcatcode=\catcode`\@
  \catcode`\@=11\relax
  \input babel.def\relax
  \catcode`\@=\atcatcode \let\atcatcode\relax
  \LdfInit}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\originalTeX}
%    The macro|\originalTeX| should be known to \TeX\ at this moment.
%    As it has to be expandable we |\let| it to |\@empty| instead of
%    |\relax|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\originalTeX\@undefined\let\originalTeX\@empty\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Because this part of the code can be included in a format, we
%    make sure that the macro which initialises the save mechanism,
%    |\babel@beginsave|, is not considered to be undefined.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\babel@beginsave\@undefined\let\babel@beginsave\relax\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
% A few macro names are reserved for future releases of \babel, which
% will use the concept of `locale':
%
% \changes{babel~3.9s}{2017/04/13}{Reserved macro names for `locale'}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\providecommand\setlocale{%
  \bbl@error
    {Not yet available}%
    {Find an armchair, sit down and wait}}
\let\uselocale\setlocale
\let\locale\setlocale
\let\selectlocale\setlocale
\let\textlocale\setlocale
\let\textlanguage\setlocale
\let\languagetext\setlocale
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Errors}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\@nolanerr}
%  \begin{macro}{\@nopatterns}
%    The \babel\ package will signal an error when a documents tries
%    to select a language that hasn't been defined earlier. When a
%    user selects a language for which no hyphenation patterns were
%    loaded into the format he will be given a warning about that
%    fact. We revert to the patterns for |\language|=0 in that case.
%    In most formats that will be (US)english, but it might also be
%    empty.
%  \begin{macro}{\@noopterr}
%    When the package was loaded without options not everything will
%    work as expected. An error message is issued in that case.
%
%    When the format knows about |\PackageError| it must be \LaTeXe,
%    so we can safely use its error handling interface. Otherwise
%    we'll have to `keep it simple'.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/07/30}{\cs{newcommand}s replaced by
%    \cs{def}'s, so that the file can be loaded twice}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2013/01/26}{Define generic variants instead of
%    duplicating each predefined message}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\edef\bbl@nulllanguage{\string\language=0}
\ifx\PackageError\@undefined
  \def\bbl@error#1#2{%
    \begingroup
      \newlinechar=`\^^J
      \def\\{^^J(babel) }%
      \errhelp{#2}\errmessage{\\#1}%
    \endgroup}
  \def\bbl@warning#1{%
    \begingroup
      \newlinechar=`\^^J
      \def\\{^^J(babel) }%
      \message{\\#1}%
    \endgroup}
  \def\bbl@info#1{%
    \begingroup
      \newlinechar=`\^^J
      \def\\{^^J}%
      \wlog{#1}%
    \endgroup}
\else
  \def\bbl@error#1#2{%
    \begingroup
      \def\\{\MessageBreak}%
      \PackageError{babel}{#1}{#2}%
    \endgroup}
  \def\bbl@warning#1{%
    \begingroup
      \def\\{\MessageBreak}%
      \PackageWarning{babel}{#1}%
    \endgroup}
  \def\bbl@info#1{%
    \begingroup
      \def\\{\MessageBreak}%
      \PackageInfo{babel}{#1}%
    \endgroup}
\fi
\@ifpackagewith{babel}{silent}
  {\let\bbl@info\@gobble
   \let\bbl@warning\@gobble}
  {}
\def\bbl@nocaption{\protect\bbl@nocaption@i}
\def\bbl@nocaption@i#1#2{% 1: text to be printed 2: caption macro \langXname
  \global\@namedef{#2}{\textbf{?#1?}}%
  \@nameuse{#2}%
  \bbl@warning{%
    \@backslashchar#2 not set. Please, define\\%
    it in the preamble with something like:\\%
    \string\renewcommand\@backslashchar#2{..}\\%
    Reported}}
\def\@nolanerr#1{%
  \bbl@error
    {You haven't defined the language #1\space yet}%
    {Your command will be ignored, type <return> to proceed}}
\def\@nopatterns#1{%
  \bbl@warning
    {No hyphenation patterns were preloaded for\\%
     the language `#1' into the format.\\%
     Please, configure your TeX system to add them and\\%
     rebuild the format. Now I will use the patterns\\%
     preloaded for \bbl@nulllanguage\space instead}}
\let\bbl@usehooks\@gobbletwo
%</kernel>
%<*patterns>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
% \section{Loading hyphenation patterns}
%
%  The following code is meant to be read by ini\TeX\ because it
%  should instruct \TeX\ to read hyphenation patterns. To this end the
%  \texttt{docstrip} option \texttt{patterns} can be used to include
%  this code in the file \file{hyphen.cfg}. Code is written with lower
%  level macros.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/05/30}{Code moved from plain.def}
%
%    We want to add a message to the message \LaTeX$\:$2.09 puts in
%    the |\everyjob| register. This could be done by the following
%    code:
%\begin{verbatim}
%    \let\orgeveryjob\everyjob
%    \def\everyjob#1{%
%      \orgeveryjob{#1}%
%      \orgeveryjob\expandafter{\the\orgeveryjob\immediate\write16{%
%          hyphenation patterns for \the\loaded@patterns loaded.}}%
%      \let\everyjob\orgeveryjob\let\orgeveryjob\@undefined}
%\end{verbatim}
%    The code above redefines the control sequence \cs{everyjob}
%    in order to be able to add something to the current contents of
%    the register. This is necessary because the processing of
%    hyphenation patterns happens long before \LaTeX\ fills the
%    register.
%
%    There are some problems with this approach though.
%  \begin{itemize}
%    \item When someone wants to use several hyphenation patterns with
%    \SliTeX\ the above scheme won't work. The reason is that \SliTeX\
%    overwrites the contents of the |\everyjob| register with its own
%    message.
%    \item Plain \TeX\ does not use the |\everyjob| register so the
%    message would not be displayed.
%  \end{itemize}
%    To circumvent this a `dirty trick' can be used. As this code is
%    only processed when creating a new format file there is one
%    command that is sure to be used, |\dump|. Therefore the original
%    |\dump| is saved in |\org@dump| and a new definition is supplied.
%
%    To make sure that \LaTeX$\:$2.09 executes the
%    |\@begindocumenthook| we would want to alter |\begin{document}|,
%    but as this done too often already, we add the new code at the
%    front of |\@preamblecmds|. But we can only do that after it has
%    been defined, so we add this piece of code to |\dump|.
%
%    This new definition starts by adding an instruction to write a
%    message on the terminal and in the transcript file to inform the
%    user of the preloaded hyphenation patterns.
%
%    Then everything is restored to the old situation and the format
%    is dumped.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
<@Make sure ProvidesFile is defined@>
\ProvidesFile{hyphen.cfg}[<@date@> <@version@> Babel hyphens]
\xdef\bbl@format{\jobname}
\ifx\AtBeginDocument\@undefined
  \def\@empty{}
  \let\orig@dump\dump
  \def\dump{%
    \ifx\@ztryfc\@undefined
    \else
      \toks0=\expandafter{\@preamblecmds}%
      \edef\@preamblecmds{\noexpand\@begindocumenthook\the\toks0}%
      \def\@begindocumenthook{}%
    \fi
    \let\dump\orig@dump\let\orig@dump\@undefined\dump}
\fi
<@Define core switching macros@>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%
%  \begin{macro}{\process@line}
%    Each line in the file \file{language.dat} is processed by
%    |\process@line| after it is read. The first thing this macro does
%    is to check whether the line starts with \texttt{=}.
%    When the first token of a line is an \texttt{=}, the macro
%    |\process@synonym| is called; otherwise the macro
%    |\process@language| will continue.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/12}{Use spaces as delimiters, to avoid
%    extra spaces. Once parsed, pass them in the traditional way}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\process@line#1#2 #3 #4 {%
  \ifx=#1%
    \process@synonym{#2}%
  \else
    \process@language{#1#2}{#3}{#4}%
  \fi
  \ignorespaces}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\process@synonym}
%
%    This macro takes care of the lines which start with an
%    \texttt{=}. It needs an empty token register to begin with.
%    |\bbl@languages| is also set to empty.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\toks@{}
\def\bbl@languages{}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% When no languages have been loaded yet, the name following the
% \texttt{=} will be a synonym for hyphenation register 0. So, it is
% stored in a token register and executed when the first pattern file
% has been processed. (The |\relax| just helps to the |\if| below
% catching synonyms without a language.)
%
% Otherwise the name will be a synonym for the language loaded last.
%
% We also need to copy the hyphenmin parameters for the synonym.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/25}{Added \cs{bbl@languages}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\process@synonym#1{%
  \ifnum\last@language=\m@ne
    \toks@\expandafter{\the\toks@\relax\process@synonym{#1}}%
  \else
    \expandafter\chardef\csname l@#1\endcsname\last@language
    \wlog{\string\l@#1=\string\language\the\last@language}%
    \expandafter\let\csname #1hyphenmins\expandafter\endcsname
      \csname\languagename hyphenmins\endcsname
    \let\bbl@elt\relax
    \edef\bbl@languages{\bbl@languages\bbl@elt{#1}{\the\last@language}{}{}}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\process@language}
%    The macro |\process@language| is used to process a non-empty line
%    from the `configuration file'. It has three arguments, each
%    delimited by white space. The first argument is the `name' of a
%    language; the second is the name of the file that contains the
%    patterns. The optional third argument is the name of a file
%    containing hyphenation exceptions.
%
%    The first thing to do is call |\addlanguage| to allocate a pattern
%    register and to make that register `active'. Then the pattern file
%    is read.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/10}{Removed \cs{selectfont} (I presume
%    it was intended to catch wrong encoding codes, but I don't think
%    this is necessary and as a side effect it might preload fonts)}
%
%    For some hyphenation patterns it is needed to load them with a
%    specific font encoding selected. This can be specified in the
%    file \file{language.dat} by adding for instance `\texttt{:T1}' to
%    the name of the language. The macro |\bbl@get@enc| extracts the
%    font encoding from the language name and stores it in
%    |\bbl@hyph@enc|. The latter can be used in hyphenation files if
%    you need to set a behavior depending on the given encoding (it
%    is set to empty if no encoding is given).
%
%    Pattern files may contain assignments to |\lefthyphenmin| and
%    |\righthyphenmin|. \TeX\ does not keep track of these
%    assignments. Therefore we try to detect such assignments and
%    store them in the |\|\langvar|hyphenmins| macro. When no
%    assignments were made we provide a default setting.
%
%    Some pattern files contain changes to the |\lccode| en |\uccode|
%    arrays. Such changes should remain local to the language;
%    therefore we process the pattern file in a group; the |\patterns|
%    command acts globally so its effect will be remembered.
%
%    Then we globally store the settings of |\lefthyphenmin| and
%    |\righthyphenmin| and close the group.
%
%    When the hyphenation patterns have been processed we need to see
%    if a file with hyphenation exceptions needs to be read. This is
%    the case when the third argument is not empty and when it does
%    not contain a space token. (Note however there is no need to save
%    hyphenation exceptions into the format.)
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/06/25}{Added \cs{bbl@languages}}
% \changes{babel~3.9f}{2013/05/16}{Restored code to set default
%    hyphenmins, which was deleted mistakenly}
%
%    \cs{bbl@languages} saves a snapshot of the loaded languagues in the
%    form  \cs{bbl@elt}\marg{language-name}\marg{number}%
%    \marg{patterns-file}\marg{exceptions-file}. Note the last 2
%    arguments are empty in `dialects' defined in |language.dat| with
%    |=|. Note also the language name can have encoding info.
%
%    Finally, if the counter |\language| is equal to zero we execute the
%    synonyms stored.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\process@language#1#2#3{%
  \expandafter\addlanguage\csname l@#1\endcsname
  \expandafter\language\csname l@#1\endcsname
  \edef\languagename{#1}%
  \bbl@hook@everylanguage{#1}%
  \bbl@get@enc#1::\@@@
  \begingroup
    \lefthyphenmin\m@ne
    \bbl@hook@loadpatterns{#2}%
    \ifnum\lefthyphenmin=\m@ne
    \else
      \expandafter\xdef\csname #1hyphenmins\endcsname{%
        \the\lefthyphenmin\the\righthyphenmin}%
    \fi
  \endgroup
  \def\bbl@tempa{#3}%
  \ifx\bbl@tempa\@empty\else
    \bbl@hook@loadexceptions{#3}%
  \fi
  \let\bbl@elt\relax
  \edef\bbl@languages{%
    \bbl@languages\bbl@elt{#1}{\the\language}{#2}{\bbl@tempa}}%
  \ifnum\the\language=\z@
    \expandafter\ifx\csname #1hyphenmins\endcsname\relax
      \set@hyphenmins\tw@\thr@@\relax
    \else
      \expandafter\expandafter\expandafter\set@hyphenmins
        \csname #1hyphenmins\endcsname
    \fi
    \the\toks@
    \toks@{}%
  \fi}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@get@enc}
%
%   \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/11}{Code much simplified}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\bbl@hyph@enc}
%    The macro |\bbl@get@enc| extracts the font encoding from the
%    language name and stores it in |\bbl@hyph@enc|. It uses delimited
%    arguments to achieve this.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@get@enc#1:#2:#3\@@@{\def\bbl@hyph@enc{#2}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%  \end{macro}
%
%    Now, hooks are defined. For efficiency reasons, they are dealt
%    here in a special way. Besides \luatex, format specific
%    configuration files are taken into account.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9b}{2013/03/25}{Fixed an idiot slip: \cs{def}
%   intead of \cs{let}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@hook@everylanguage#1{}
\def\bbl@hook@loadpatterns#1{\input #1\relax}
\let\bbl@hook@loadexceptions\bbl@hook@loadpatterns
\let\bbl@hook@loadkernel\bbl@hook@loadpatterns
\begingroup
  \def\AddBabelHook#1#2{%
    \expandafter\ifx\csname bbl@hook@#2\endcsname\relax
      \def\next{\toks1}%
    \else
      \def\next{\expandafter\gdef\csname bbl@hook@#2\endcsname####1}%
    \fi
    \next}
  \ifx\directlua\@undefined
    \ifx\XeTeXinputencoding\@undefined\else
      \input xebabel.def
    \fi
  \else
    \input luababel.def
  \fi
  \openin1 = babel-\bbl@format.cfg
  \ifeof1
  \else
    \input babel-\bbl@format.cfg\relax
  \fi
  \closein1
\endgroup
\bbl@hook@loadkernel{switch.def}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\readconfigfile}
%    The configuration file can now be opened for reading.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\openin1 = language.dat
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    See if the file exists, if not, use the default hyphenation file
%    \file{hyphen.tex}. The user will be informed about this.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\languagename{english}%
\ifeof1
  \message{I couldn't find the file language.dat,\space
           I will try the file hyphen.tex}
  \input hyphen.tex\relax
  \chardef\l@english\z@
\else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Pattern registers are allocated using count register
%    |\last@language|. Its initial value is~0. The definition of the
%    macro |\newlanguage| is such that it first increments the count
%    register and then defines the language. In order to have the
%    first patterns loaded in pattern register number~0 we initialize
%    |\last@language| with the value~$-1$.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \last@language\m@ne
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We now read lines from the file until the end is found
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \loop
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    While reading from the input, it is useful to switch off
%    recognition of the end-of-line character. This saves us stripping
%    off spaces from the contents of the control sequence.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \endlinechar\m@ne
    \read1 to \bbl@line
    \endlinechar`\^^M
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/14}{Test simplified and moved}
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/12}{Use only spaces as delimiters and
%    not /, as previouly done}
%
%    If the file has reached its end, exit from the loop here. If not,
%    empty lines are skipped. Add 3 space characters to the end of
%    |\bbl@line|. This is needed to be able to recognize the arguments
%    of |\process@line| later on. The default language should be the
%    very first one.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \if T\ifeof1F\fi T\relax
      \ifx\bbl@line\@empty\else
        \edef\bbl@line{\bbl@line\space\space\space}%
        \expandafter\process@line\bbl@line\relax
      \fi
  \repeat
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Check for the end of the file. We must reverse the test for
%    |\ifeof| without |\else|. Then reactivate the default patterns.
%
% \changes{babel~3.8m}{2008/07/08}{Also restore the name of the
%    language in \cs{languagename} (PR 4039)}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \begingroup
    \def\bbl@elt#1#2#3#4{%
      \global\language=#2\relax
      \gdef\languagename{#1}%
      \def\bbl@elt##1##2##3##4{}}%
    \bbl@languages
  \endgroup
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    and close the configuration file.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\closein1
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We add a message about the fact that babel is loaded in the
%    format and with which language patterns to the \cs{everyjob}
%    register.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/09/25}{The list of languages is not
%    printed every job any more (it is saved in \cs{bbl@languages}).}
% \changes{babel~3.9g}{2013/07/28}{In non-LaTeX formats the number of
%    languages were not printed. Moved from \cs{dump} and cleaned up:
%    now \cs{toks}8 is expanded here.}
% \changes{babel~3.9o}{2016/01/25}{The number of languages loaded was
%    off by 1.}
% \changes{babel~3.21}{2018/05/09}{The message is not printed any more.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\if/\the\toks@/\else
  \errhelp{language.dat loads no language, only synonyms}
  \errmessage{Orphan language synonym}
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Also remove some macros from memory and raise an error
%    if |\toks@| is not empty. Finally load \file{switch.def}, but the
%    latter is not required and the line inputting it may be commented
%    out.
%
% \changes{babel~3.9a}{2012/12/11}{Raise error if there are synonyms
%    without languages}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\bbl@line\@undefined
\let\process@line\@undefined
\let\process@synonym\@undefined
\let\process@language\@undefined
\let\bbl@get@enc\@undefined
\let\bbl@hyph@enc\@undefined
\let\bbl@tempa\@undefined
\let\bbl@hook@loadkernel\@undefined
\let\bbl@hook@everylanguage\@undefined
\let\bbl@hook@loadpatterns\@undefined
\let\bbl@hook@loadexceptions\@undefined
%</patterns>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Here the code for ini\TeX\ ends.
%  \end{macro}
%
% \section{Font handling with fontspec}
%
% \changes{3.15}{2017/10/30}{New way to select fonts, with \cs{babelfont}}
%
% Add the bidi handler just before luaoftload, which is loaded by default
% by LaTeX. Just in case, consider the possibility it has not been
% loaded. First, a couple of definitions related to bidi [misplaced].
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*More package options>>
\ifodd\bbl@engine
  \DeclareOption{bidi=basic-r}%
    {\ExecuteOptions{bidi=basic}}
  \DeclareOption{bidi=basic}%
    {\let\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode
     \newattribute\bbl@attr@dir
     \bbl@exp{\output{\bodydir\pagedir\the\output}}%
     \AtEndOfPackage{\EnableBabelHook{babel-bidi}}}
\else
  \DeclareOption{bidi=basic-r}%
    {\ExecuteOptions{bidi=basic}}
  \DeclareOption{bidi=basic}%
    {\bbl@error
      {The bidi method `basic' is available only in\\%
       luatex. I'll continue with `bidi=default', so\\%
       expect wrong results}%
      {See the manual for further details.}%
    \let\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode
    \AtEndOfPackage{%
      \EnableBabelHook{babel-bidi}%
      \bbl@xebidipar}}
\fi
\DeclareOption{bidi=default}%
  {\let\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode
   \ifodd\bbl@engine
     \newattribute\bbl@attr@dir
     \bbl@exp{\output{\bodydir\pagedir\the\output}}%
   \fi
   \AtEndOfPackage{%
     \EnableBabelHook{babel-bidi}%
     \ifodd\bbl@engine\else
       \bbl@xebidipar
     \fi}}
%<</More package options>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% With explicit languages, we could define the font at once, but we
% don't. Just wait and see if the language is actually activated.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Font selection>>
\bbl@trace{Font handling with fontspec}
\@onlypreamble\babelfont
\newcommand\babelfont[2][]{%  1=langs/scripts 2=fam
  \edef\bbl@tempa{#1}%
  \def\bbl@tempb{#2}%
  \ifx\fontspec\@undefined
    \usepackage{fontspec}%
  \fi
  \EnableBabelHook{babel-fontspec}%
  \bbl@bblfont}
\newcommand\bbl@bblfont[2][]{% 1=features 2=fontname
  \bbl@ifunset{\bbl@tempb family}{\bbl@providefam{\bbl@tempb}}{}%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@lsys@\languagename}{\bbl@provide@lsys{\languagename}}{}%
  \expandafter\bbl@ifblank\expandafter{\bbl@tempa}%
    {\bbl@csarg\edef{\bbl@tempb dflt@}{<>{#1}{#2}}% save bbl@rmdflt@
     \bbl@exp{%
       \let\<bbl@\bbl@tempb dflt@\languagename>\<bbl@\bbl@tempb dflt@>%
       \\\bbl@font@set\<bbl@\bbl@tempb dflt@\languagename>%
                      \<\bbl@tempb default>\<\bbl@tempb family>}}%
    {\bbl@foreach\bbl@tempa{% ie bbl@rmdflt@lang / *scrt
       \bbl@csarg\def{\bbl@tempb dflt@##1}{<>{#1}{#2}}}}}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% If the family in the previous command does not exist, it must be
% defined. Here is how:
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@providefam#1{%
  \bbl@exp{%
    \\\newcommand\<#1default>{}% Just define it
    \\\bbl@add@list\\\bbl@font@fams{#1}%
    \\\DeclareRobustCommand\<#1family>{%
      \\\not@math@alphabet\<#1family>\relax
      \\\fontfamily\<#1default>\\\selectfont}%
    \\\DeclareTextFontCommand{\<text#1>}{\<#1family>}}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The following macro is activated when the hook |babel-fontspec| is
% enabled.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@switchfont{%
  \bbl@ifunset{bbl@lsys@\languagename}{\bbl@provide@lsys{\languagename}}{}%
  \bbl@exp{%  eg Arabic -> arabic
    \lowercase{\edef\\\bbl@tempa{\bbl@cs{sname@\languagename}}}}%
  \bbl@foreach\bbl@font@fams{%
    \bbl@ifunset{bbl@##1dflt@\languagename}%    (1) language?
      {\bbl@ifunset{bbl@##1dflt@*\bbl@tempa}%   (2) from script?
         {\bbl@ifunset{bbl@##1dflt@}%           2=F - (3) from generic?
           {}%                                  123=F - nothing!
           {\bbl@exp{%                          3=T - from generic
              \global\let\<bbl@##1dflt@\languagename>%
                         \<bbl@##1dflt@>}}}%
         {\bbl@exp{%                            2=T - from script
            \global\let\<bbl@##1dflt@\languagename>%
                       \<bbl@##1dflt@*\bbl@tempa>}}}%
      {}}%                               1=T - language, already defined
  \def\bbl@tempa{%
    \bbl@warning{The current font is not a standard family:\\%
      \fontname\font\\%
      Script and Language are not applied. Consider defining a\\%
      new family with \string\babelfont. Reported}}%
  \bbl@foreach\bbl@font@fams{%     don't gather with prev for
    \bbl@ifunset{bbl@##1dflt@\languagename}%
      {\bbl@cs{famrst@##1}%
       \global\bbl@csarg\let{famrst@##1}\relax}%
      {\bbl@exp{% order is relevant
         \\\bbl@add\\\originalTeX{%
           \\\bbl@font@rst{\bbl@cs{##1dflt@\languagename}}%
                          \<##1default>\<##1family>{##1}}%
         \\\bbl@font@set\<bbl@##1dflt@\languagename>% the main part!
                        \<##1default>\<##1family>}}}%
  \bbl@ifrestoring{}{\bbl@tempa}}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Now the macros defining the font with \textsf{fontspec}.
%
% When there are repeated keys in \textsf{fontspec}, the last value
% wins. So, we just place the ini settings at the beginning, and user
% settings will take precedence. We must deactivate temporarily
% |\bbl@mapselect| because |\selectfont| is called internally when a
% font is defined.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@font@set#1#2#3{% eg \bbl@rmdflt@lang \rmdefault \rmfamily
  \bbl@xin@{<>}{#1}%
  \ifin@
    \bbl@exp{\\\bbl@fontspec@set\\#1\expandafter\@gobbletwo#1}%
  \fi
  \bbl@exp{%
    \def\\#2{#1}%        eg, \rmdefault{\bbl@rmdflt@lang}
    \\\bbl@ifsamestring{#2}{\f@family}{\\#3\let\\\bbl@tempa\relax}{}}}
\def\bbl@fontspec@set#1#2#3{% eg \bbl@rmdflt@lang fnt-opt fnt-nme
  \let\bbl@tempe\bbl@mapselect
  \let\bbl@mapselect\relax
  \bbl@exp{\<fontspec_set_family:Nnn>\\#1%
    {\bbl@cs{lsys@\languagename},#2}}{#3}%
  \let\bbl@mapselect\bbl@tempe
  \bbl@toglobal#1}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% font@rst and famrst are only used when there is no global settings,
% to save and restore de previous families. Not really necessary, but
% done for optimization.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@font@rst#1#2#3#4{%
  \bbl@csarg\def{famrst@#4}{\bbl@font@set{#1}#2#3}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The default font families. They are eurocentric, but the list can be
% expanded easily with |\babelfont|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@font@fams{rm,sf,tt}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% The old tentative way. Short and preverved for compatibility, but
% deprecated. Note there is no direct alternative for
% |\babelFSfeatures|. The reason in explained in the user guide, but
% essentially -- that was not the way to go :-).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\newcommand\babelFSstore[2][]{%
  \bbl@ifblank{#1}%
    {\bbl@csarg\def{sname@#2}{Latin}}%
    {\bbl@csarg\def{sname@#2}{#1}}%
  \bbl@provide@dirs{#2}%
  \bbl@csarg\ifnum{wdir@#2}>\z@
    \let\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode
    \EnableBabelHook{babel-bidi}%
  \fi
  \bbl@foreach{#2}{%
    \bbl@FSstore{##1}{rm}\rmdefault\bbl@save@rmdefault
    \bbl@FSstore{##1}{sf}\sfdefault\bbl@save@sfdefault
    \bbl@FSstore{##1}{tt}\ttdefault\bbl@save@ttdefault}}
\def\bbl@FSstore#1#2#3#4{%
  \bbl@csarg\edef{#2default#1}{#3}%
  \expandafter\addto\csname extras#1\endcsname{%
    \let#4#3%
    \ifx#3\f@family
      \edef#3{\csname bbl@#2default#1\endcsname}%
      \fontfamily{#3}\selectfont
    \else
      \edef#3{\csname bbl@#2default#1\endcsname}%
    \fi}%
  \expandafter\addto\csname noextras#1\endcsname{%
    \ifx#3\f@family
      \fontfamily{#4}\selectfont
    \fi
    \let#3#4}}
\let\bbl@langfeatures\@empty
\def\babelFSfeatures{% make sure \fontspec is redefined once
  \let\bbl@ori@fontspec\fontspec
  \renewcommand\fontspec[1][]{%
    \bbl@ori@fontspec[\bbl@langfeatures##1]}
  \let\babelFSfeatures\bbl@FSfeatures
  \babelFSfeatures}
\def\bbl@FSfeatures#1#2{%
  \expandafter\addto\csname extras#1\endcsname{%
    \babel@save\bbl@langfeatures
    \edef\bbl@langfeatures{#2,}}}
%<</Font selection>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%
% \section{Hooks for XeTeX and LuaTeX}
%
% \subsection{XeTeX}
%
%    Unfortunately, the current encoding cannot be retrieved and
%    therefore it is reset always to |utf8|, which seems a sensible
%    default.
%
%    \LaTeX{} sets many ``codes'' just before loading
%    \verb|hyphen.cfg|. That is not a problem in luatex, but in xetex
%    they must be reset to the proper value. Most of the work is done in
%    \textsf{xe(la)tex.ini}, so here we just ``undo'' some of the
%    changes done by \LaTeX. Anyway, for consistency Lua\TeX{} also
%    resets the catcodes.
%
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0c}{2014/03/10}{Reset ``codes'' set by \cs{LaTeX}
%    to what xetex expects. Used also in luatex.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0f}{2015/12/06}{This block was assigned to
%    xetex, even in luatex. Fixed here and below.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Restore Unicode catcodes before loading patterns>>
  \begingroup
      % Reset chars "80-"C0 to category "other", no case mapping:
    \catcode`\@=11 \count@=128
    \loop\ifnum\count@<192
      \global\uccode\count@=0 \global\lccode\count@=0
      \global\catcode\count@=12 \global\sfcode\count@=1000
      \advance\count@ by 1 \repeat
      % Other:
    \def\O ##1 {%
      \global\uccode"##1=0 \global\lccode"##1=0
      \global\catcode"##1=12 \global\sfcode"##1=1000 }%
      % Letter:
    \def\L ##1 ##2 ##3 {\global\catcode"##1=11
      \global\uccode"##1="##2
      \global\lccode"##1="##3
      % Uppercase letters have sfcode=999:
      \ifnum"##1="##3 \else \global\sfcode"##1=999 \fi }%
      % Letter without case mappings:
    \def\l ##1 {\L ##1 ##1 ##1 }%
    \l 00AA
    \L 00B5 039C 00B5
    \l 00BA
    \O 00D7
    \l 00DF
    \O 00F7
    \L 00FF 0178 00FF
  \endgroup
  \input #1\relax
%<</Restore Unicode catcodes before loading patterns>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Some more common code.
%
% \changes{babel 3.17}{2018/01/24}{Tools for bidi footnote}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<<*Footnote changes>>
\bbl@trace{Bidi footnotes}
\ifx\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode
  \def\bbl@footnote#1#2#3{%
    \@ifnextchar[%
      {\bbl@footnote@o{#1}{#2}{#3}}%
      {\bbl@footnote@x{#1}{#2}{#3}}}
  \def\bbl@footnote@x#1#2#3#4{%
    \bgroup
      \select@language@x{\bbl@main@language}%
      \bbl@fn@footnote{#2#1{\ignorespaces#4}#3}%
    \egroup}
  \def\bbl@footnote@o#1#2#3[#4]#5{%
    \bgroup
      \select@language@x{\bbl@main@language}%
      \bbl@fn@footnote[#4]{#2#1{\ignorespaces#5}#3}%
    \egroup}
  \def\bbl@footnotetext#1#2#3{%
    \@ifnextchar[%
      {\bbl@footnotetext@o{#1}{#2}{#3}}%
      {\bbl@footnotetext@x{#1}{#2}{#3}}}
  \def\bbl@footnotetext@x#1#2#3#4{%
    \bgroup
      \select@language@x{\bbl@main@language}%
      \bbl@fn@footnotetext{#2#1{\ignorespaces#4}#3}%
    \egroup}
  \def\bbl@footnotetext@o#1#2#3[#4]#5{%
    \bgroup
      \select@language@x{\bbl@main@language}%
      \bbl@fn@footnotetext[#4]{#2#1{\ignorespaces#5}#3}%
    \egroup}
  \def\BabelFootnote#1#2#3#4{%
    \ifx\bbl@fn@footnote\@undefined
      \let\bbl@fn@footnote\footnote
    \fi
    \ifx\bbl@fn@footnotetext\@undefined
      \let\bbl@fn@footnotetext\footnotetext
    \fi
    \bbl@ifblank{#2}%
      {\def#1{\bbl@footnote{\@firstofone}{#3}{#4}}
       \@namedef{\bbl@stripslash#1text}%
         {\bbl@footnotetext{\@firstofone}{#3}{#4}}}%
      {\def#1{\bbl@exp{\\\bbl@footnote{\\\foreignlanguage{#2}}}{#3}{#4}}%
       \@namedef{\bbl@stripslash#1text}%
         {\bbl@exp{\\\bbl@footnotetext{\\\foreignlanguage{#2}}}{#3}{#4}}}}
\fi
%<</Footnote changes>>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Now, the code.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*xetex>
\def\BabelStringsDefault{unicode}
\let\xebbl@stop\relax
\AddBabelHook{xetex}{encodedcommands}{%
  \def\bbl@tempa{#1}%
  \ifx\bbl@tempa\@empty
    \XeTeXinputencoding"bytes"%
  \else
    \XeTeXinputencoding"#1"%
  \fi
  \def\xebbl@stop{\XeTeXinputencoding"utf8"}}
\AddBabelHook{xetex}{stopcommands}{%
  \xebbl@stop
  \let\xebbl@stop\relax}
\AddBabelHook{xetex}{loadkernel}{%
<@Restore Unicode catcodes before loading patterns@>}
\ifx\DisableBabelHook\@undefined\endinput\fi
\AddBabelHook{babel-fontspec}{afterextras}{\bbl@switchfont}
\DisableBabelHook{babel-fontspec}
<@Font selection@>
\input txtbabel.def
%</xetex>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Layout}
%
% \changes{babel~3.16}{2018/01/02}{Option layout - first available options:
% sectioning, counters, lists, columns, contents}
%
% \textit{In progress.}
%
% Unfortunately, proper support for \xetex{} requires patching somehow
% lots of macros and packages (and some issues related to |\special|s
% remain, like color and hyperlinks). At least at this stage, \babel{}
% will not do it and therefore a package like \textsf{bidi} (by Vafa
% Khalighi) would be necessary to overcome the limitations of
% \xetex. Any help in making \babel{} and \textsf{bidi} collaborate
% will be welcome, although the underlying concepts in both packages
% seem very different. Note also elements like headlines and margins
% can be modified easily with packages like \textsf{fancyhdr},
% \textsf{typearea} or \textsf{titleps}, and \textsf{geometry}.
%
% |\bbl@startskip| and |\bbl@endskip| are available to package
% authors. Thanks to the \TeX{} expansion mechanism the following
% constructs are valid: |\adim\bbl@startskip|,
% |\advance\bbl@startskip\adim|, |\bbl@startskip\adim|.
%
% Consider |txtbabel| as a shorthand for \textit{tex--xet babel},
% which is the bidi model in both \pdftex{} and \xetex{}.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*texxet>
\bbl@trace{Redefinitions for bidi layout}
\def\bbl@sspre@caption{%
  \bbl@exp{\everyhbox{\\\bbl@textdir\bbl@cs{wdir@\bbl@main@language}}}}
\ifx\bbl@opt@layout\@nnil\endinput\fi  % No layout
\def\bbl@startskip{\ifcase\bbl@thepardir\leftskip\else\rightskip\fi}
\def\bbl@endskip{\ifcase\bbl@thepardir\rightskip\else\leftskip\fi}
\ifx\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode % A poor test for bidi=
  \def\@hangfrom#1{%
    \setbox\@tempboxa\hbox{{#1}}%
    \hangindent\ifcase\bbl@thepardir\wd\@tempboxa\else-\wd\@tempboxa\fi
    \noindent\box\@tempboxa}
  \def\raggedright{%
    \let\\\@centercr
    \bbl@startskip\z@skip
    \@rightskip\@flushglue
    \bbl@endskip\@rightskip
    \parindent\z@
    \parfillskip\bbl@startskip}
  \def\raggedleft{%
    \let\\\@centercr
    \bbl@startskip\@flushglue
    \bbl@endskip\z@skip
    \parindent\z@
    \parfillskip\bbl@endskip}
\fi
\IfBabelLayout{lists}
  {\def\list#1#2{%
    \ifnum \@listdepth >5\relax
      \@toodeep
    \else
      \global\advance\@listdepth\@ne
    \fi
    \rightmargin\z@
    \listparindent\z@
    \itemindent\z@
    \csname @list\romannumeral\the\@listdepth\endcsname
    \def\@itemlabel{#1}%
    \let\makelabel\@mklab
    \@nmbrlistfalse
    #2\relax
    \@trivlist
    \parskip\parsep
    \parindent\listparindent
    \advance\linewidth-\rightmargin
    \advance\linewidth-\leftmargin
    \advance\@totalleftmargin
      \ifcase\bbl@thepardir\leftmargin\else\rightmargin\fi
    \parshape\@ne\@totalleftmargin\linewidth
    \ignorespaces}%
  \ifcase\bbl@engine
    \def\labelenumii{)\theenumii(}%
    \def\p@enumiii{\p@enumii)\theenumii(}%
  \fi
  \def\@verbatim{%
    \trivlist \item\relax
    \if@minipage\else\vskip\parskip\fi
    \bbl@startskip\textwidth
    \advance\bbl@startskip-\linewidth
    \bbl@endskip\z@skip
    \parindent\z@
    \parfillskip\@flushglue
    \parskip\z@skip
    \@@par
    \language\l@nohyphenation
    \@tempswafalse
    \def\par{%
      \if@tempswa
        \leavevmode\null
        \@@par\penalty\interlinepenalty
      \else
        \@tempswatrue
        \ifhmode\@@par\penalty\interlinepenalty\fi
      \fi}%
    \let\do\@makeother \dospecials
    \obeylines \verbatim@font \@noligs
    \everypar\expandafter{\the\everypar\unpenalty}}}
  {}
\IfBabelLayout{contents}
  {\def\@dottedtocline#1#2#3#4#5{%
     \ifnum#1>\c@tocdepth\else
       \vskip \z@ \@plus.2\p@
       {\bbl@startskip#2\relax
        \bbl@endskip\@tocrmarg
        \parfillskip-\bbl@endskip
        \parindent#2\relax
        \@afterindenttrue
        \interlinepenalty\@M
        \leavevmode
        \@tempdima#3\relax
        \advance\bbl@startskip\@tempdima
        \null\nobreak\hskip-\bbl@startskip
        {#4}\nobreak
        \leaders\hbox{%
          $\m@th\mkern\@dotsep mu\hbox{.}\mkern\@dotsep mu$}%
          \hfill\nobreak
          \hb@xt@\@pnumwidth{\hfil\normalfont\normalcolor#5}%
          \par}%
     \fi}}
  {}
\IfBabelLayout{columns}
  {\def\@outputdblcol{%
     \if@firstcolumn
       \global\@firstcolumnfalse
       \global\setbox\@leftcolumn\copy\@outputbox
       \splitmaxdepth\maxdimen
       \vbadness\maxdimen
       \setbox\@outputbox\vbox{\unvbox\@outputbox\unskip}%
       \setbox\@outputbox\vsplit\@outputbox to\maxdimen
       \toks@\expandafter{\topmark}%
       \xdef\@firstcoltopmark{\the\toks@}%
       \toks@\expandafter{\splitfirstmark}%
       \xdef\@firstcolfirstmark{\the\toks@}%
       \ifx\@firstcolfirstmark\@empty
         \global\let\@setmarks\relax
       \else
         \gdef\@setmarks{%
           \let\firstmark\@firstcolfirstmark
           \let\topmark\@firstcoltopmark}%
       \fi
     \else
       \global\@firstcolumntrue
       \setbox\@outputbox\vbox{%
         \hb@xt@\textwidth{%
           \hskip\columnwidth
           \hfil
           {\normalcolor\vrule \@width\columnseprule}%
           \hfil
           \hb@xt@\columnwidth{\box\@leftcolumn \hss}%
           \hskip-\textwidth
           \hb@xt@\columnwidth{\box\@outputbox \hss}%
           \hskip\columnsep
           \hskip\columnwidth}}%
       \@combinedblfloats
       \@setmarks
       \@outputpage
       \begingroup
         \@dblfloatplacement
         \@startdblcolumn
         \@whilesw\if@fcolmade \fi{\@outputpage
         \@startdblcolumn}%
       \endgroup
     \fi}}%
  {}
<@Footnote changes@>
\IfBabelLayout{footnotes}%
  {\BabelFootnote\footnote\languagename{}{}%
   \BabelFootnote\localfootnote\languagename{}{}%
   \BabelFootnote\mainfootnote{}{}{}}
  {}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%      Implicitly reverses sectioning labels in |bidi=basic-r|, because
%      the full stop is not in contact with L numbers any more. I
%      think there must be a better way.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\IfBabelLayout{counters}%
  {\let\bbl@latinarabic=\@arabic
   \def\@arabic#1{\babelsublr{\bbl@latinarabic#1}}%
   \let\bbl@asciiroman=\@roman
   \def\@roman#1{\babelsublr{\ensureascii{\bbl@asciiroman#1}}}%
   \let\bbl@asciiRoman=\@Roman
   \def\@Roman#1{\babelsublr{\ensureascii{\bbl@asciiRoman#1}}}}{}
%</texxet>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{LuaTeX}
%
% The new loader for luatex is based solely on |language.dat|, which
% is read on the fly. The code shouldn't be executed when the format
% is build, so we check if |\AddBabelHook| is defined. Then comes a
% modified version of the loader in |hyphen.cfg| (without the
% hyphenmins stuff, which is under the direct control of \babel).
%
% The names |\l@<language>| are defined and take some value from the
% beginning because all \texttt{ldf} files assume this for the
% corresponding language to be considered valid, but patterns are not
% loaded (except the first one). This is done later, when the language
% is first selected (which usually means when the \texttt{ldf}
% finishes). If a language has been loaded, |\bbl@hyphendata@<num>|
% exists (with the names of the files read).
%
% The default setup preloads the first language into the format. This
% is intended mainly for `english', so that it's available without
% further intervention from the user.  To avoid duplicating it, the
% following rule applies: if the ``0th'' language and the first
% language in |language.dat| have the same name then just ignore the
% latter. If there are new synonymous, the are added, but note if the
% language patterns have not been preloaded they won't at run time.
%
% Other preloaded languages could be read twice, if they has been
% preloaded into the format. This is not optimal, but it shouldn't
% happen very often -- with \luatex{} patterns are best loaded when
% the document is typeset, and the ``0th'' language is preloaded just
% for backwards compatibility.
%
% As of 1.1b, lua(e)tex is taken into account. Formerly, loading of
% patterns on the fly didn't work in this format, but with the new
% loader it does.  Unfortunately, the format is not based on \babel,
% and data could be duplicated, because languages are reassigned above
% those in the format (nothing serious, anyway). Note even with this
% format |language.dat| is used (under the principle of a single
% source), instead of |language.def|.
%
% Of course, there is room for improvements, like tools to read and
% reassign languages, which would require modifying the language list,
% and better error handling.
%
% We need catcode tables, but no format (targeted by \babel) provide a
% command to allocate them (although there are packages like
% \textsf{ctablestack}). For the moment, a dangerous approach is used
% -- just allocate a high random number and cross the fingers. To
% complicate things, \textsf{etex.sty} changes the way languages are
% allocated.
%
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0b}{2013/04/22}{luatex-hyphen is loaded with
%   require. Changes supplied by \'{E}lie Roux.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0c}{2014/03/10}{Defined hook for
%   `initiateactive', to fetch the next token and continue only if
%   letter or other.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0d}{2014/03/21}{Removed the `misfeature' for
%   `initiateactive'.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0e}{2015/05/10}{Use brackets instead of
%   \cs{luaescapestring}.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0e}{2015/07/26}{Added function addpattern
%   and modified the patterns hook.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.1a}{2016/01/26}{New hyphenation loader for
%   luatex.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.1b}{2016/02/05}{Also lua(e)tex.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.1c}{2016/02/08}{Base reading of patterns on
%   number, not in name.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.1c}{2016/02/08}{Some hacks for polyglossia. To
%   be improved.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.1c}{2016/02/23}{Thoroughly revised.}
% \changes{bbunicode~1.1d}{2016/4/22}{Lua: Fixed a line break at
%   \cs{foreignlanguage} with unloaded patterns. Added
%   \cs{babelcatcodetablenum}, just in case.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*luatex>
\ifx\AddBabelHook\@undefined
\bbl@trace{Read language.dat}
\begingroup
  \toks@{}
  \count@\z@ % 0=start, 1=0th, 2=normal
  \def\bbl@process@line#1#2 #3 #4 {%
    \ifx=#1%
      \bbl@process@synonym{#2}%
    \else
      \bbl@process@language{#1#2}{#3}{#4}%
    \fi
    \ignorespaces}
  \def\bbl@manylang{%
    \ifnum\bbl@last>\@ne
      \bbl@info{Non-standard hyphenation setup}%
    \fi
    \let\bbl@manylang\relax}
  \def\bbl@process@language#1#2#3{%
    \ifcase\count@
      \@ifundefined{zth@#1}{\count@\tw@}{\count@\@ne}%
    \or
      \count@\tw@
    \fi
    \ifnum\count@=\tw@
      \expandafter\addlanguage\csname l@#1\endcsname
      \language\allocationnumber
      \chardef\bbl@last\allocationnumber
      \bbl@manylang
      \let\bbl@elt\relax
      \xdef\bbl@languages{%
        \bbl@languages\bbl@elt{#1}{\the\language}{#2}{#3}}%
    \fi
    \the\toks@
    \toks@{}}
  \def\bbl@process@synonym@aux#1#2{%
    \global\expandafter\chardef\csname l@#1\endcsname#2\relax
    \let\bbl@elt\relax
    \xdef\bbl@languages{%
      \bbl@languages\bbl@elt{#1}{#2}{}{}}}%
  \def\bbl@process@synonym#1{%
    \ifcase\count@
      \toks@\expandafter{\the\toks@\relax\bbl@process@synonym{#1}}%
    \or
      \@ifundefined{zth@#1}{\bbl@process@synonym@aux{#1}{0}}{}%
    \else
      \bbl@process@synonym@aux{#1}{\the\bbl@last}%
    \fi}
  \ifx\bbl@languages\@undefined % Just a (sensible?) guess
    \chardef\l@english\z@
    \chardef\l@USenglish\z@
    \chardef\bbl@last\z@
    \global\@namedef{bbl@hyphendata@0}{{hyphen.tex}{}}
    \gdef\bbl@languages{%
      \bbl@elt{english}{0}{hyphen.tex}{}%
      \bbl@elt{USenglish}{0}{}{}}
  \else
    \global\let\bbl@languages@format\bbl@languages
    \def\bbl@elt#1#2#3#4{% Remove all except language 0
      \ifnum#2>\z@\else
        \noexpand\bbl@elt{#1}{#2}{#3}{#4}%
      \fi}%
    \xdef\bbl@languages{\bbl@languages}%
  \fi
  \def\bbl@elt#1#2#3#4{\@namedef{zth@#1}{}} % Define flags
  \bbl@languages
  \openin1=language.dat
  \ifeof1
    \bbl@warning{I couldn't find language.dat. No additional\\%
                 patterns loaded. Reported}%
  \else
    \loop
      \endlinechar\m@ne
      \read1 to \bbl@line
      \endlinechar`\^^M
      \if T\ifeof1F\fi T\relax
        \ifx\bbl@line\@empty\else
          \edef\bbl@line{\bbl@line\space\space\space}%
          \expandafter\bbl@process@line\bbl@line\relax
        \fi
    \repeat
  \fi
\endgroup
\bbl@trace{Macros for reading patterns files}
\def\bbl@get@enc#1:#2:#3\@@@{\def\bbl@hyph@enc{#2}}
\ifx\babelcatcodetablenum\@undefined
  \def\babelcatcodetablenum{5211}
\fi
\def\bbl@luapatterns#1#2{%
  \bbl@get@enc#1::\@@@
  \setbox\z@\hbox\bgroup
    \begingroup
      \ifx\catcodetable\@undefined
        \let\savecatcodetable\luatexsavecatcodetable
        \let\initcatcodetable\luatexinitcatcodetable
        \let\catcodetable\luatexcatcodetable
      \fi
      \savecatcodetable\babelcatcodetablenum\relax
      \initcatcodetable\numexpr\babelcatcodetablenum+1\relax
      \catcodetable\numexpr\babelcatcodetablenum+1\relax
      \catcode`\#=6  \catcode`\$=3 \catcode`\&=4 \catcode`\^=7
      \catcode`\_=8  \catcode`\{=1 \catcode`\}=2 \catcode`\~=13
      \catcode`\@=11 \catcode`\^^I=10 \catcode`\^^J=12
      \catcode`\<=12 \catcode`\>=12 \catcode`\*=12 \catcode`\.=12
      \catcode`\-=12 \catcode`\/=12 \catcode`\[=12 \catcode`\]=12
      \catcode`\`=12 \catcode`\'=12 \catcode`\"=12
      \input #1\relax
      \catcodetable\babelcatcodetablenum\relax
    \endgroup
    \def\bbl@tempa{#2}%
    \ifx\bbl@tempa\@empty\else
      \input #2\relax
    \fi
  \egroup}%
\def\bbl@patterns@lua#1{%
  \language=\expandafter\ifx\csname l@#1:\f@encoding\endcsname\relax
    \csname l@#1\endcsname
    \edef\bbl@tempa{#1}%
  \else
    \csname l@#1:\f@encoding\endcsname
    \edef\bbl@tempa{#1:\f@encoding}%
  \fi\relax
  \@namedef{lu@texhyphen@loaded@\the\language}{}% Temp
  \@ifundefined{bbl@hyphendata@\the\language}%
    {\def\bbl@elt##1##2##3##4{%
       \ifnum##2=\csname l@\bbl@tempa\endcsname % #2=spanish, dutch:OT1...
         \def\bbl@tempb{##3}%
         \ifx\bbl@tempb\@empty\else % if not a synonymous
           \def\bbl@tempc{{##3}{##4}}%
         \fi
         \bbl@csarg\xdef{hyphendata@##2}{\bbl@tempc}%
       \fi}%
     \bbl@languages
     \@ifundefined{bbl@hyphendata@\the\language}%
       {\bbl@info{No hyphenation patterns were set for\\%
                  language '\bbl@tempa'. Reported}}%
       {\expandafter\expandafter\expandafter\bbl@luapatterns
          \csname bbl@hyphendata@\the\language\endcsname}}{}}
\endinput\fi
\begingroup
\catcode`\%=12
\catcode`\'=12
\catcode`\"=12
\catcode`\:=12
\directlua{
  Babel = Babel or {}
  function Babel.bytes(line)
    return line:gsub("(.)",
      function (chr) return unicode.utf8.char(string.byte(chr)) end)
  end
  function Babel.begin_process_input()
    if luatexbase and luatexbase.add_to_callback then
      luatexbase.add_to_callback('process_input_buffer',
                                 Babel.bytes,'Babel.bytes')
    else
      Babel.callback = callback.find('process_input_buffer')
      callback.register('process_input_buffer',Babel.bytes)
    end
  end
  function Babel.end_process_input ()
    if luatexbase and luatexbase.remove_from_callback then
      luatexbase.remove_from_callback('process_input_buffer','Babel.bytes')
    else
      callback.register('process_input_buffer',Babel.callback)
    end
  end
  function Babel.addpatterns(pp, lg)
    local lg = lang.new(lg)
    local pats = lang.patterns(lg) or ''
    lang.clear_patterns(lg)
    for p in pp:gmatch('[^%s]+') do
      ss = ''
      for i in string.utfcharacters(p:gsub('%d', '')) do
         ss = ss .. '%d?' .. i
      end
      ss = ss:gsub('^%%d%?%.', '%%.') .. '%d?'
      ss = ss:gsub('%.%%d%?$', '%%.')
      pats, n = pats:gsub('%s' .. ss .. '%s', ' ' .. p .. ' ')
      if n == 0 then
        tex.sprint(
          [[\string\csname\space bbl@info\endcsname{New pattern: ]]
          .. p .. [[}]])
        pats = pats .. ' ' .. p
      else
        tex.sprint(
          [[\string\csname\space bbl@info\endcsname{Renew pattern: ]]
          .. p .. [[}]])
      end
    end
    lang.patterns(lg, pats)
  end
}
\endgroup
\def\BabelStringsDefault{unicode}
\let\luabbl@stop\relax
\AddBabelHook{luatex}{encodedcommands}{%
  \def\bbl@tempa{utf8}\def\bbl@tempb{#1}%
  \ifx\bbl@tempa\bbl@tempb\else
    \directlua{Babel.begin_process_input()}%
    \def\luabbl@stop{%
      \directlua{Babel.end_process_input()}}%
  \fi}%
\AddBabelHook{luatex}{stopcommands}{%
  \luabbl@stop
  \let\luabbl@stop\relax}
\AddBabelHook{luatex}{patterns}{%
  \@ifundefined{bbl@hyphendata@\the\language}%
    {\def\bbl@elt##1##2##3##4{%
       \ifnum##2=\csname l@#2\endcsname % #2=spanish, dutch:OT1...
         \def\bbl@tempb{##3}%
         \ifx\bbl@tempb\@empty\else % if not a synonymous
           \def\bbl@tempc{{##3}{##4}}%
         \fi
         \bbl@csarg\xdef{hyphendata@##2}{\bbl@tempc}%
       \fi}%
     \bbl@languages
     \@ifundefined{bbl@hyphendata@\the\language}%
       {\bbl@info{No hyphenation patterns were set for\\%
                  language '#2'. Reported}}%
       {\expandafter\expandafter\expandafter\bbl@luapatterns
          \csname bbl@hyphendata@\the\language\endcsname}}{}%
  \@ifundefined{bbl@patterns@}{}{%
    \begingroup
      \bbl@xin@{,\number\language,}{,\bbl@pttnlist}%
      \ifin@\else
        \ifx\bbl@patterns@\@empty\else
           \directlua{ Babel.addpatterns(
             [[\bbl@patterns@]], \number\language) }%
        \fi
        \@ifundefined{bbl@patterns@#1}%
          \@empty
          {\directlua{ Babel.addpatterns(
               [[\space\csname bbl@patterns@#1\endcsname]],
               \number\language) }}%
        \xdef\bbl@pttnlist{\bbl@pttnlist\number\language,}%
      \fi
    \endgroup}}
\AddBabelHook{luatex}{everylanguage}{%
  \def\process@language##1##2##3{%
    \def\process@line####1####2 ####3 ####4 {}}}
\AddBabelHook{luatex}{loadpatterns}{%
   \input #1\relax
   \expandafter\gdef\csname bbl@hyphendata@\the\language\endcsname
     {{#1}{}}}
\AddBabelHook{luatex}{loadexceptions}{%
   \input #1\relax
   \def\bbl@tempb##1##2{{##1}{#1}}%
   \expandafter\xdef\csname bbl@hyphendata@\the\language\endcsname
     {\expandafter\expandafter\expandafter\bbl@tempb
      \csname bbl@hyphendata@\the\language\endcsname}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%  \begin{macro}{\babelpatterns}
%
%    This macro adds patterns. Two macros are used to store them:
%    |\bbl@patterns@| for the global ones and |\bbl@patterns@<lang>|
%    for language ones. We make sure there is a space between words
%    when multiple commands are used.
% \changes{bbunicode~1.0e}{2015/07/26}{Macro \cs{babelpatterns} added}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\@onlypreamble\babelpatterns
\AtEndOfPackage{%
  \newcommand\babelpatterns[2][\@empty]{%
    \ifx\bbl@patterns@\relax
      \let\bbl@patterns@\@empty
    \fi
    \ifx\bbl@pttnlist\@empty\else
      \bbl@warning{%
        You must not intermingle \string\selectlanguage\space and\\%
        \string\babelpatterns\space or some patterns will not\\%
        be taken into account. Reported}%
    \fi
    \ifx\@empty#1%
      \protected@edef\bbl@patterns@{\bbl@patterns@\space#2}%
    \else
      \edef\bbl@tempb{\zap@space#1 \@empty}%
      \bbl@for\bbl@tempa\bbl@tempb{%
        \bbl@fixname\bbl@tempa
        \bbl@iflanguage\bbl@tempa{%
          \bbl@csarg\protected@edef{patterns@\bbl@tempa}{%
            \@ifundefined{bbl@patterns@\bbl@tempa}%
              \@empty
              {\csname bbl@patterns@\bbl@tempa\endcsname\space}%
            #2}}}%
    \fi}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%  \end{macro}
%
% Common stuff.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\AddBabelHook{luatex}{loadkernel}{%
<@Restore Unicode catcodes before loading patterns@>}
\ifx\DisableBabelHook\@undefined\endinput\fi
\AddBabelHook{babel-fontspec}{afterextras}{\bbl@switchfont}
\DisableBabelHook{babel-fontspec}
<@Font selection@>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Layout}
%
% \textbf{Work in progress}.
%
% Unlike \xetex{}, \luatex{} requires only minimal changes for
% right-to-left layouts, particularly in monolingual documents (the
% engine itself reverses boxes -- including column order or headings
% --, margins, etc.) and with |bidi=basic-r|, without having to patch
% almost any macro where text direction is relevant.
%
% |\@hangfrom| is useful in many contexts and it is redefined always
% with the |layout| option.
%
% There are, however, a number of issues when the text direction is
% not the same as the box direction (as set by |\bodydir|), and when
% |\parbox| and |\hangindent| are involved. Fortunately, latest
% releases of \luatex{} simplify a lot the solution with |\shapemode|.
%
% \changes{3.18}{2018/02/14}{\cs{bbl@nextfake}, similar to the old
%   \cs{nextfakemath} in Omega}
% \changes{3.19}{2018/04/23}{Patch \cs{@eqnnum}, somewhat ad hoc. To be
%   improved.}
% \changes{3.21}{2018/05/09}{The ad hoc \cs{@eqnnum} was buggy. Fixed.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\bbl@trace{Redefinitions for bidi layout}
\ifx\@eqnnum\@undefined\else
  \ifx\bbl@attr@dir\@undefined\else
    \edef\@eqnnum{{%
      \unexpanded{\ifcase\bbl@attr@dir\else\bbl@textdir\@ne\fi}%
      \unexpanded\expandafter{\@eqnnum}}}
  \fi
\fi
\ifx\bbl@opt@layout\@nnil\endinput\fi  % if no layout
\ifx\bbl@beforeforeign\leavevmode % A poor test for bidi=
  \def\bbl@nextfake#1{%
    \mathdir\bodydir  % non-local, use always inside a group!
    \bbl@exp{%
      #1%              Once entered in math, set boxes to restore values
      \everyvbox{%
        \the\everyvbox
        \bodydir\the\bodydir
        \mathdir\the\mathdir
        \everyhbox{\the\everyhbox}%
        \everyvbox{\the\everyvbox}}%
      \everyhbox{%
        \the\everyhbox
        \bodydir\the\bodydir
        \mathdir\the\mathdir
        \everyhbox{\the\everyhbox}%
        \everyvbox{\the\everyvbox}}}}%
  \def\@hangfrom#1{%
    \setbox\@tempboxa\hbox{{#1}}%
    \hangindent\wd\@tempboxa
    \ifnum\bbl@getluadir{page}=\bbl@getluadir{par}\else
      \shapemode\@ne
    \fi
    \noindent\box\@tempboxa}
\fi
\IfBabelLayout{tabular}
  {\def\@tabular{%
     \leavevmode\hbox\bgroup\bbl@nextfake$%   %$
     \let\@acol\@tabacol       \let\@classz\@tabclassz
     \let\@classiv\@tabclassiv \let\\\@tabularcr\@tabarray}}
  {}
\IfBabelLayout{lists}
  {\def\list#1#2{%
     \ifnum \@listdepth >5\relax
       \@toodeep
     \else
       \global\advance\@listdepth\@ne
     \fi
     \rightmargin\z@
     \listparindent\z@
     \itemindent\z@
     \csname @list\romannumeral\the\@listdepth\endcsname
     \def\@itemlabel{#1}%
     \let\makelabel\@mklab
     \@nmbrlistfalse
     #2\relax
     \@trivlist
     \parskip\parsep
     \parindent\listparindent
     \advance\linewidth -\rightmargin
     \advance\linewidth -\leftmargin
     \advance\@totalleftmargin \leftmargin
     \parshape \@ne
     \@totalleftmargin \linewidth
     \ifnum\bbl@getluadir{page}=\bbl@getluadir{par}\else
       \shapemode\tw@
     \fi
     \ignorespaces}}
  {}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%      Implicitly reverses sectioning labels in bidi=basic-r, because
%      the full stop is not in contact with L numbers any more. I
%      think there must be a better way. Assumes |bidi=basic-r|, but
%      there are some additional readjustments for |bidi=default|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\IfBabelLayout{counters}%
  {\def\@textsuperscript#1{{% lua has separate settings for math
     \m@th
     \mathdir\pagedir % required with basic-r; ok with default, too
     \ensuremath{^{\mbox {\fontsize \sf@size \z@ #1}}}}}%
   \let\bbl@latinarabic=\@arabic
   \def\@arabic#1{\babelsublr{\bbl@latinarabic#1}}%
   \@ifpackagewith{babel}{bidi=default}%
     {\let\bbl@asciiroman=\@roman
      \def\@roman#1{\babelsublr{\ensureascii{\bbl@asciiroman#1}}}%
      \let\bbl@asciiRoman=\@Roman
      \def\@Roman#1{\babelsublr{\ensureascii{\bbl@asciiRoman#1}}}%
      \def\labelenumii{)\theenumii(}%
      \def\p@enumiii{\p@enumii)\theenumii(}}{}}{}
<@Footnote changes@>
\IfBabelLayout{footnotes}%
  {\BabelFootnote\footnote\languagename{}{}%
   \BabelFootnote\localfootnote\languagename{}{}%
   \BabelFootnote\mainfootnote{}{}{}}
  {}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Some \LaTeX{} macros use internally the math mode for text
% formatting. They have very little in common and are grouped here, as
% a single option.
%
% \changes{3.19}{2018/04/23}{New option extras for layout}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\IfBabelLayout{extras}%
  {\def\underline#1{%
     \relax
     \ifmmode\@@underline{#1}%
     \else\bbl@nextfake$\@@underline{\hbox{#1}}\m@th$\relax\fi}%
   \DeclareRobustCommand{\LaTeXe}{\mbox{\m@th
     \if b\expandafter\@car\f@series\@nil\boldmath\fi
     \babelsublr{%
       \LaTeX\kern.15em2\bbl@nextfake$_{\textstyle\varepsilon}$}}}}
  {}
%</luatex>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Auto bidi with \texttt{basic-r}}
%
% \changes{3.14}{2017/09/30}{LuaTeX - support for R/AL texts - basic-r}
%
% The file \textsf{babel-bidi.lua} currently only contains data. It is
% a large and boring file and it's not shown here. See the generated
% file.
%\iffalse
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*bidi>
-- Data from Unicode and ConTeXt

Babel = Babel or {}

Babel.ranges={
 {0x0590, 0x05FF, 'r'},
 {0x0600, 0x07BF, 'al'},
 {0x07C0, 0x085F, 'r'},
 {0x0860, 0x086F, 'al'},
 {0x08A0, 0x08FF, 'al'},
 {0xFB1D, 0xFB4F, 'r'},
 {0xFB50, 0xFDFF, 'al'},
 {0xFE70, 0xFEFF, 'al'},
 {0x10800, 0x10C4F, 'r'},
 {0x1E800, 0x1E8DF, 'r'},
 {0x1E900, 0x1E95F, 'r'},
 {0x1F300, 0x1F9FF, 'on'}
}

Babel.characters={
 [0x0]={d='bn'},
 [0x1]={d='bn'},
 [0x2]={d='bn'},
 [0x3]={d='bn'},
 [0x4]={d='bn'},
 [0x5]={d='bn'},
 [0x6]={d='bn'},
 [0x7]={d='bn'},
 [0x8]={d='bn'},
 [0x9]={d='s'},
 [0xA]={d='b'},
 [0xB]={d='s'},
 [0xC]={d='ws'},
 [0xD]={d='b'},
 [0xE]={d='bn'},
 [0xF]={d='bn'},
 [0x10]={d='bn'},
 [0x11]={d='bn'},
 [0x12]={d='bn'},
 [0x13]={d='bn'},
 [0x14]={d='bn'},
 [0x15]={d='bn'},
 [0x16]={d='bn'},
 [0x17]={d='bn'},
 [0x18]={d='bn'},
 [0x19]={d='bn'},
 [0x1A]={d='bn'},
 [0x1B]={d='bn'},
 [0x1C]={d='b'},
 [0x1D]={d='b'},
 [0x1E]={d='b'},
 [0x1F]={d='s'},
 [0x20]={d='ws'},
 [0x21]={d='on'},
 [0x22]={d='on'},
 [0x23]={d='et'},
 [0x24]={d='et'},
 [0x25]={d='et'},
 [0x26]={d='on'},
 [0x27]={d='on'},
 [0x28]={d='on', m=0x29},
 [0x29]={d='on', m=0x28},
 [0x2A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B]={d='es'},
 [0x2C]={d='cs'},
 [0x2D]={d='es'},
 [0x2E]={d='cs'},
 [0x2F]={d='cs'},
 [0x30]={d='en'},
 [0x31]={d='en'},
 [0x32]={d='en'},
 [0x33]={d='en'},
 [0x34]={d='en'},
 [0x35]={d='en'},
 [0x36]={d='en'},
 [0x37]={d='en'},
 [0x38]={d='en'},
 [0x39]={d='en'},
 [0x3A]={d='cs'},
 [0x3B]={d='on'},
 [0x3C]={d='on', m=0x3E},
 [0x3D]={d='on'},
 [0x3E]={d='on', m=0x3C},
 [0x3F]={d='on'},
 [0x40]={d='on'},
 [0x5B]={d='on', m=0x5D},
 [0x5C]={d='on'},
 [0x5D]={d='on', m=0x5B},
 [0x5E]={d='on'},
 [0x5F]={d='on'},
 [0x60]={d='on'},
 [0x7B]={d='on', m=0x7D},
 [0x7C]={d='on'},
 [0x7D]={d='on', m=0x7B},
 [0x7E]={d='on'},
 [0x7F]={d='bn'},
 [0x80]={d='bn'},
 [0x81]={d='bn'},
 [0x82]={d='bn'},
 [0x83]={d='bn'},
 [0x84]={d='bn'},
 [0x85]={d='b'},
 [0x86]={d='bn'},
 [0x87]={d='bn'},
 [0x88]={d='bn'},
 [0x89]={d='bn'},
 [0x8A]={d='bn'},
 [0x8B]={d='bn'},
 [0x8C]={d='bn'},
 [0x8D]={d='bn'},
 [0x8E]={d='bn'},
 [0x8F]={d='bn'},
 [0x90]={d='bn'},
 [0x91]={d='bn'},
 [0x92]={d='bn'},
 [0x93]={d='bn'},
 [0x94]={d='bn'},
 [0x95]={d='bn'},
 [0x96]={d='bn'},
 [0x97]={d='bn'},
 [0x98]={d='bn'},
 [0x99]={d='bn'},
 [0x9A]={d='bn'},
 [0x9B]={d='bn'},
 [0x9C]={d='bn'},
 [0x9D]={d='bn'},
 [0x9E]={d='bn'},
 [0x9F]={d='bn'},
 [0xA0]={d='cs'},
 [0xA1]={d='on'},
 [0xA2]={d='et'},
 [0xA3]={d='et'},
 [0xA4]={d='et'},
 [0xA5]={d='et'},
 [0xA6]={d='on'},
 [0xA7]={d='on'},
 [0xA8]={d='on'},
 [0xA9]={d='on'},
 [0xAB]={d='on', m=0xBB},
 [0xAC]={d='on'},
 [0xAD]={d='bn'},
 [0xAE]={d='on'},
 [0xAF]={d='on'},
 [0xB0]={d='et'},
 [0xB1]={d='et'},
 [0xB2]={d='en'},
 [0xB3]={d='en'},
 [0xB4]={d='on'},
 [0xB6]={d='on'},
 [0xB7]={d='on'},
 [0xB8]={d='on'},
 [0xB9]={d='en'},
 [0xBB]={d='on', m=0xAB},
 [0xBC]={d='on'},
 [0xBD]={d='on'},
 [0xBE]={d='on'},
 [0xBF]={d='on'},
 [0xD7]={d='on'},
 [0xF7]={d='on'},
 [0x2B9]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA]={d='on'},
 [0x2C2]={d='on'},
 [0x2C3]={d='on'},
 [0x2C4]={d='on'},
 [0x2C5]={d='on'},
 [0x2C6]={d='on'},
 [0x2C7]={d='on'},
 [0x2C8]={d='on'},
 [0x2C9]={d='on'},
 [0x2CA]={d='on'},
 [0x2CB]={d='on'},
 [0x2CC]={d='on'},
 [0x2CD]={d='on'},
 [0x2CE]={d='on'},
 [0x2CF]={d='on'},
 [0x2D2]={d='on'},
 [0x2D3]={d='on'},
 [0x2D4]={d='on'},
 [0x2D5]={d='on'},
 [0x2D6]={d='on'},
 [0x2D7]={d='on'},
 [0x2D8]={d='on'},
 [0x2D9]={d='on'},
 [0x2DA]={d='on'},
 [0x2DB]={d='on'},
 [0x2DC]={d='on'},
 [0x2DD]={d='on'},
 [0x2DE]={d='on'},
 [0x2DF]={d='on'},
 [0x2E5]={d='on'},
 [0x2E6]={d='on'},
 [0x2E7]={d='on'},
 [0x2E8]={d='on'},
 [0x2E9]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED]={d='on'},
 [0x2EF]={d='on'},
 [0x2F0]={d='on'},
 [0x2F1]={d='on'},
 [0x2F2]={d='on'},
 [0x2F3]={d='on'},
 [0x2F4]={d='on'},
 [0x2F5]={d='on'},
 [0x2F6]={d='on'},
 [0x2F7]={d='on'},
 [0x2F8]={d='on'},
 [0x2F9]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC]={d='on'},
 [0x2FD]={d='on'},
 [0x2FE]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF]={d='on'},
 [0x300]={d='nsm'},
 [0x301]={d='nsm'},
 [0x302]={d='nsm'},
 [0x303]={d='nsm'},
 [0x304]={d='nsm'},
 [0x305]={d='nsm'},
 [0x306]={d='nsm'},
 [0x307]={d='nsm'},
 [0x308]={d='nsm'},
 [0x309]={d='nsm'},
 [0x30A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x30B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x30C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x30D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x30E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x30F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x310]={d='nsm'},
 [0x311]={d='nsm'},
 [0x312]={d='nsm'},
 [0x313]={d='nsm'},
 [0x314]={d='nsm'},
 [0x315]={d='nsm'},
 [0x316]={d='nsm'},
 [0x317]={d='nsm'},
 [0x318]={d='nsm'},
 [0x319]={d='nsm'},
 [0x31A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x31B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x31C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x31D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x31E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x31F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x320]={d='nsm'},
 [0x321]={d='nsm'},
 [0x322]={d='nsm'},
 [0x323]={d='nsm'},
 [0x324]={d='nsm'},
 [0x325]={d='nsm'},
 [0x326]={d='nsm'},
 [0x327]={d='nsm'},
 [0x328]={d='nsm'},
 [0x329]={d='nsm'},
 [0x32A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x32B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x32C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x32D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x32E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x32F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x330]={d='nsm'},
 [0x331]={d='nsm'},
 [0x332]={d='nsm'},
 [0x333]={d='nsm'},
 [0x334]={d='nsm'},
 [0x335]={d='nsm'},
 [0x336]={d='nsm'},
 [0x337]={d='nsm'},
 [0x338]={d='nsm'},
 [0x339]={d='nsm'},
 [0x33A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x33B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x33C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x33D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x33E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x33F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x340]={d='nsm'},
 [0x341]={d='nsm'},
 [0x342]={d='nsm'},
 [0x343]={d='nsm'},
 [0x344]={d='nsm'},
 [0x345]={d='nsm'},
 [0x346]={d='nsm'},
 [0x347]={d='nsm'},
 [0x348]={d='nsm'},
 [0x349]={d='nsm'},
 [0x34A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x34B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x34C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x34D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x34E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x34F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x350]={d='nsm'},
 [0x351]={d='nsm'},
 [0x352]={d='nsm'},
 [0x353]={d='nsm'},
 [0x354]={d='nsm'},
 [0x355]={d='nsm'},
 [0x356]={d='nsm'},
 [0x357]={d='nsm'},
 [0x358]={d='nsm'},
 [0x359]={d='nsm'},
 [0x35A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x35B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x35C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x35D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x35E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x35F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x360]={d='nsm'},
 [0x361]={d='nsm'},
 [0x362]={d='nsm'},
 [0x363]={d='nsm'},
 [0x364]={d='nsm'},
 [0x365]={d='nsm'},
 [0x366]={d='nsm'},
 [0x367]={d='nsm'},
 [0x368]={d='nsm'},
 [0x369]={d='nsm'},
 [0x36A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x36B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x36C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x36D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x36E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x36F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x374]={d='on'},
 [0x375]={d='on'},
 [0x37E]={d='on'},
 [0x384]={d='on'},
 [0x385]={d='on'},
 [0x387]={d='on'},
 [0x3F6]={d='on'},
 [0x483]={d='nsm'},
 [0x484]={d='nsm'},
 [0x485]={d='nsm'},
 [0x486]={d='nsm'},
 [0x487]={d='nsm'},
 [0x488]={d='nsm'},
 [0x489]={d='nsm'},
 [0x58A]={d='on'},
 [0x58D]={d='on'},
 [0x58E]={d='on'},
 [0x58F]={d='et'},
 [0x591]={d='nsm'},
 [0x592]={d='nsm'},
 [0x593]={d='nsm'},
 [0x594]={d='nsm'},
 [0x595]={d='nsm'},
 [0x596]={d='nsm'},
 [0x597]={d='nsm'},
 [0x598]={d='nsm'},
 [0x599]={d='nsm'},
 [0x59A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x59B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x59C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x59D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x59E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x59F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5A9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5AA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5AB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5AC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5AD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5AE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5AF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5B9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5BA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5BB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5BC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5BD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5BF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5C1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5C2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5C4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5C5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x5C7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x600]={d='an'},
 [0x601]={d='an'},
 [0x602]={d='an'},
 [0x603]={d='an'},
 [0x604]={d='an'},
 [0x605]={d='an'},
 [0x606]={d='on'},
 [0x607]={d='on'},
 [0x608]={d='al'},
 [0x609]={d='et'},
 [0x60A]={d='et'},
 [0x60B]={d='al'},
 [0x60C]={d='cs'},
 [0x60D]={d='al'},
 [0x60E]={d='on'},
 [0x60F]={d='on'},
 [0x610]={d='nsm'},
 [0x611]={d='nsm'},
 [0x612]={d='nsm'},
 [0x613]={d='nsm'},
 [0x614]={d='nsm'},
 [0x615]={d='nsm'},
 [0x616]={d='nsm'},
 [0x617]={d='nsm'},
 [0x618]={d='nsm'},
 [0x619]={d='nsm'},
 [0x61A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x64B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x64C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x64D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x64E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x64F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x650]={d='nsm'},
 [0x651]={d='nsm'},
 [0x652]={d='nsm'},
 [0x653]={d='nsm'},
 [0x654]={d='nsm'},
 [0x655]={d='nsm'},
 [0x656]={d='nsm'},
 [0x657]={d='nsm'},
 [0x658]={d='nsm'},
 [0x659]={d='nsm'},
 [0x65A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x65B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x65C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x65D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x65E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x65F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x660]={d='an'},
 [0x661]={d='an'},
 [0x662]={d='an'},
 [0x663]={d='an'},
 [0x664]={d='an'},
 [0x665]={d='an'},
 [0x666]={d='an'},
 [0x667]={d='an'},
 [0x668]={d='an'},
 [0x669]={d='an'},
 [0x66A]={d='et'},
 [0x66B]={d='an'},
 [0x66C]={d='an'},
 [0x670]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6D6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6D7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6D8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6D9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6DA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6DB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6DC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6DD]={d='an'},
 [0x6DE]={d='on'},
 [0x6DF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6E9]={d='on'},
 [0x6EA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6EB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6EC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6ED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x6F0]={d='en'},
 [0x6F1]={d='en'},
 [0x6F2]={d='en'},
 [0x6F3]={d='en'},
 [0x6F4]={d='en'},
 [0x6F5]={d='en'},
 [0x6F6]={d='en'},
 [0x6F7]={d='en'},
 [0x6F8]={d='en'},
 [0x6F9]={d='en'},
 [0x711]={d='nsm'},
 [0x730]={d='nsm'},
 [0x731]={d='nsm'},
 [0x732]={d='nsm'},
 [0x733]={d='nsm'},
 [0x734]={d='nsm'},
 [0x735]={d='nsm'},
 [0x736]={d='nsm'},
 [0x737]={d='nsm'},
 [0x738]={d='nsm'},
 [0x739]={d='nsm'},
 [0x73A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x73B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x73C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x73D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x73E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x73F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x740]={d='nsm'},
 [0x741]={d='nsm'},
 [0x742]={d='nsm'},
 [0x743]={d='nsm'},
 [0x744]={d='nsm'},
 [0x745]={d='nsm'},
 [0x746]={d='nsm'},
 [0x747]={d='nsm'},
 [0x748]={d='nsm'},
 [0x749]={d='nsm'},
 [0x74A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7A6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7A7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7A8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7A9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7AA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7AB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7AC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7AD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7AE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7AF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7B0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7EB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7EC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7ED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7EE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7EF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7F0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7F1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7F2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7F3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x7F6]={d='on'},
 [0x7F7]={d='on'},
 [0x7F8]={d='on'},
 [0x7F9]={d='on'},
 [0x816]={d='nsm'},
 [0x817]={d='nsm'},
 [0x818]={d='nsm'},
 [0x819]={d='nsm'},
 [0x81B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x81C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x81D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x81E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x81F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x820]={d='nsm'},
 [0x821]={d='nsm'},
 [0x822]={d='nsm'},
 [0x823]={d='nsm'},
 [0x825]={d='nsm'},
 [0x826]={d='nsm'},
 [0x827]={d='nsm'},
 [0x829]={d='nsm'},
 [0x82A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x82B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x82C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x82D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x859]={d='nsm'},
 [0x85A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x85B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8D4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8D5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8D6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8D7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8D8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8D9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8DA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8DB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8DC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8DD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8DE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8DF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E2]={d='an'},
 [0x8E3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8E9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8EA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8EB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8EC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8ED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8EE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8EF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8F9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8FA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8FB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8FC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8FD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8FE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x8FF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x900]={d='nsm'},
 [0x901]={d='nsm'},
 [0x902]={d='nsm'},
 [0x93A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x93C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x941]={d='nsm'},
 [0x942]={d='nsm'},
 [0x943]={d='nsm'},
 [0x944]={d='nsm'},
 [0x945]={d='nsm'},
 [0x946]={d='nsm'},
 [0x947]={d='nsm'},
 [0x948]={d='nsm'},
 [0x94D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x951]={d='nsm'},
 [0x952]={d='nsm'},
 [0x953]={d='nsm'},
 [0x954]={d='nsm'},
 [0x955]={d='nsm'},
 [0x956]={d='nsm'},
 [0x957]={d='nsm'},
 [0x962]={d='nsm'},
 [0x963]={d='nsm'},
 [0x981]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9BC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9C1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9C2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9C3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9C4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9CD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9E2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9E3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x9F2]={d='et'},
 [0x9F3]={d='et'},
 [0x9FB]={d='et'},
 [0xA01]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA02]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA3C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA41]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA42]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA47]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA48]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA4B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA4C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA4D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA51]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA70]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA71]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA75]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA81]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA82]={d='nsm'},
 [0xABC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAC1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAC2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAC3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAC4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAC5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAC7]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAC8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xACD]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAE2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAE3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAF1]={d='et'},
 [0xB01]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB3C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB3F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB41]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB42]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB43]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB44]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB4D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB56]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB62]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB63]={d='nsm'},
 [0xB82]={d='nsm'},
 [0xBC0]={d='nsm'},
 [0xBCD]={d='nsm'},
 [0xBF3]={d='on'},
 [0xBF4]={d='on'},
 [0xBF5]={d='on'},
 [0xBF6]={d='on'},
 [0xBF7]={d='on'},
 [0xBF8]={d='on'},
 [0xBF9]={d='et'},
 [0xBFA]={d='on'},
 [0xC00]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC3E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC3F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC40]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC46]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC47]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC48]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC4A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC4B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC4C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC4D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC55]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC56]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC62]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC63]={d='nsm'},
 [0xC78]={d='on'},
 [0xC79]={d='on'},
 [0xC7A]={d='on'},
 [0xC7B]={d='on'},
 [0xC7C]={d='on'},
 [0xC7D]={d='on'},
 [0xC7E]={d='on'},
 [0xC81]={d='nsm'},
 [0xCBC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xCCC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xCCD]={d='nsm'},
 [0xCE2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xCE3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD01]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD41]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD42]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD43]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD44]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD4D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD62]={d='nsm'},
 [0xD63]={d='nsm'},
 [0xDCA]={d='nsm'},
 [0xDD2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xDD3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xDD4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xDD6]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE31]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE34]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE35]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE36]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE37]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE38]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE39]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE3A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE3F]={d='et'},
 [0xE47]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE48]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE49]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE4A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE4B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE4C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE4D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xE4E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEB1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEB4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEB5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEB6]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEB7]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEB8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEB9]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEBB]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEBC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEC8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xEC9]={d='nsm'},
 [0xECA]={d='nsm'},
 [0xECB]={d='nsm'},
 [0xECC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xECD]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF18]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF19]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF35]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF37]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF39]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF3A]={d='on', m=0xF3B},
 [0xF3B]={d='on', m=0xF3A},
 [0xF3C]={d='on', m=0xF3D},
 [0xF3D]={d='on', m=0xF3C},
 [0xF71]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF72]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF73]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF74]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF75]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF76]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF77]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF78]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF79]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF7A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF7B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF7C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF7D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF7E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF80]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF81]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF82]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF83]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF84]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF86]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF87]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF8D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF8E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF8F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF90]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF91]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF92]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF93]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF94]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF95]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF96]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF97]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF99]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF9A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF9B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF9C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF9D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF9E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xF9F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA0]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA6]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA7]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFA9]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFAA]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFAB]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFAC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFAD]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFAE]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFAF]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB0]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB6]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB7]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB9]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFBA]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFBB]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFBC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFC6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x102D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x102E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x102F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1030]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1032]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1033]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1034]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1035]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1036]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1037]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1039]={d='nsm'},
 [0x103A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x103D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x103E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1058]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1059]={d='nsm'},
 [0x105E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x105F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1060]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1071]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1072]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1073]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1074]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1082]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1085]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1086]={d='nsm'},
 [0x108D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x109D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x135D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x135E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x135F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1390]={d='on'},
 [0x1391]={d='on'},
 [0x1392]={d='on'},
 [0x1393]={d='on'},
 [0x1394]={d='on'},
 [0x1395]={d='on'},
 [0x1396]={d='on'},
 [0x1397]={d='on'},
 [0x1398]={d='on'},
 [0x1399]={d='on'},
 [0x1400]={d='on'},
 [0x1680]={d='ws'},
 [0x169B]={d='on', m=0x169C},
 [0x169C]={d='on', m=0x169B},
 [0x1712]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1713]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1714]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1732]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1733]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1734]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1752]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1753]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1772]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1773]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17B4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17B5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17B7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17B8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17B9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17BA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17BB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17BC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17BD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17C6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17C9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17CA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17CB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17CC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17CD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17CE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17CF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17D0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17D1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17D2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17D3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17DB]={d='et'},
 [0x17DD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x17F0]={d='on'},
 [0x17F1]={d='on'},
 [0x17F2]={d='on'},
 [0x17F3]={d='on'},
 [0x17F4]={d='on'},
 [0x17F5]={d='on'},
 [0x17F6]={d='on'},
 [0x17F7]={d='on'},
 [0x17F8]={d='on'},
 [0x17F9]={d='on'},
 [0x1800]={d='on'},
 [0x1801]={d='on'},
 [0x1802]={d='on'},
 [0x1803]={d='on'},
 [0x1804]={d='on'},
 [0x1805]={d='on'},
 [0x1806]={d='on'},
 [0x1807]={d='on'},
 [0x1808]={d='on'},
 [0x1809]={d='on'},
 [0x180A]={d='on'},
 [0x180B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x180C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x180D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x180E]={d='bn'},
 [0x1885]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1886]={d='nsm'},
 [0x18A9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1920]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1921]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1922]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1927]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1928]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1932]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1939]={d='nsm'},
 [0x193A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x193B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1940]={d='on'},
 [0x1944]={d='on'},
 [0x1945]={d='on'},
 [0x19DE]={d='on'},
 [0x19DF]={d='on'},
 [0x19E0]={d='on'},
 [0x19E1]={d='on'},
 [0x19E2]={d='on'},
 [0x19E3]={d='on'},
 [0x19E4]={d='on'},
 [0x19E5]={d='on'},
 [0x19E6]={d='on'},
 [0x19E7]={d='on'},
 [0x19E8]={d='on'},
 [0x19E9]={d='on'},
 [0x19EA]={d='on'},
 [0x19EB]={d='on'},
 [0x19EC]={d='on'},
 [0x19ED]={d='on'},
 [0x19EE]={d='on'},
 [0x19EF]={d='on'},
 [0x19F0]={d='on'},
 [0x19F1]={d='on'},
 [0x19F2]={d='on'},
 [0x19F3]={d='on'},
 [0x19F4]={d='on'},
 [0x19F5]={d='on'},
 [0x19F6]={d='on'},
 [0x19F7]={d='on'},
 [0x19F8]={d='on'},
 [0x19F9]={d='on'},
 [0x19FA]={d='on'},
 [0x19FB]={d='on'},
 [0x19FC]={d='on'},
 [0x19FD]={d='on'},
 [0x19FE]={d='on'},
 [0x19FF]={d='on'},
 [0x1A17]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A18]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A1B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A56]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A58]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A59]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A5A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A5B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A5C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A5D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A5E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A60]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A62]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A65]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A66]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A67]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A68]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A69]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A6A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A6B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A6C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A73]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A74]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A75]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A76]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A77]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A78]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A79]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A7A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A7B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A7C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1A7F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1AB9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1ABA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1ABB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1ABC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1ABD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1ABE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B00]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B01]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B02]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B03]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B34]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B36]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B37]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B38]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B39]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B3A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B3C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B42]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B6B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B6C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B6D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B6E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B6F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B70]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B71]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B72]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B73]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B80]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1B81]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BA2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BA3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BA4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BA5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BA8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BA9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BAB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BAC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BAD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BE6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BE8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BE9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BEF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BF0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BF1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C2C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C2D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C2E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C2F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C30]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C31]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C32]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C33]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C36]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1C37]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CD9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CDA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CDB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CDC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CDD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CDE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CDF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CE8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CF4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CF8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1CF9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DC9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DCA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DCB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DCC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DCD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DCE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DCF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DD9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DDA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DDB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DDC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DDD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DDE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DDF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DE9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DEA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DEB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DEC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DEE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DEF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DF0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DF1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DF2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DF3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DF4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DF5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DFB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DFC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DFD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DFE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DFF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1FBD]={d='on'},
 [0x1FBF]={d='on'},
 [0x1FC0]={d='on'},
 [0x1FC1]={d='on'},
 [0x1FCD]={d='on'},
 [0x1FCE]={d='on'},
 [0x1FCF]={d='on'},
 [0x1FDD]={d='on'},
 [0x1FDE]={d='on'},
 [0x1FDF]={d='on'},
 [0x1FED]={d='on'},
 [0x1FEE]={d='on'},
 [0x1FEF]={d='on'},
 [0x1FFD]={d='on'},
 [0x1FFE]={d='on'},
 [0x2000]={d='ws'},
 [0x2001]={d='ws'},
 [0x2002]={d='ws'},
 [0x2003]={d='ws'},
 [0x2004]={d='ws'},
 [0x2005]={d='ws'},
 [0x2006]={d='ws'},
 [0x2007]={d='ws'},
 [0x2008]={d='ws'},
 [0x2009]={d='ws'},
 [0x200A]={d='ws'},
 [0x200B]={d='bn'},
 [0x200C]={d='bn'},
 [0x200D]={d='bn'},
 [0x200F]={d='r'},
 [0x2010]={d='on'},
 [0x2011]={d='on'},
 [0x2012]={d='on'},
 [0x2013]={d='on'},
 [0x2014]={d='on'},
 [0x2015]={d='on'},
 [0x2016]={d='on'},
 [0x2017]={d='on'},
 [0x2018]={d='on'},
 [0x2019]={d='on'},
 [0x201A]={d='on'},
 [0x201B]={d='on'},
 [0x201C]={d='on'},
 [0x201D]={d='on'},
 [0x201E]={d='on'},
 [0x201F]={d='on'},
 [0x2020]={d='on'},
 [0x2021]={d='on'},
 [0x2022]={d='on'},
 [0x2023]={d='on'},
 [0x2024]={d='on'},
 [0x2025]={d='on'},
 [0x2026]={d='on'},
 [0x2027]={d='on'},
 [0x2028]={d='ws'},
 [0x2029]={d='b'},
 [0x202A]={d='lre'},
 [0x202B]={d='rle'},
 [0x202C]={d='pdf'},
 [0x202D]={d='lro'},
 [0x202E]={d='rlo'},
 [0x202F]={d='cs'},
 [0x2030]={d='et'},
 [0x2031]={d='et'},
 [0x2032]={d='et'},
 [0x2033]={d='et'},
 [0x2034]={d='et'},
 [0x2035]={d='on'},
 [0x2036]={d='on'},
 [0x2037]={d='on'},
 [0x2038]={d='on'},
 [0x2039]={d='on', m=0x203A},
 [0x203A]={d='on', m=0x2039},
 [0x203B]={d='on'},
 [0x203C]={d='on'},
 [0x203D]={d='on'},
 [0x203E]={d='on'},
 [0x203F]={d='on'},
 [0x2040]={d='on'},
 [0x2041]={d='on'},
 [0x2042]={d='on'},
 [0x2043]={d='on'},
 [0x2044]={d='cs'},
 [0x2045]={d='on', m=0x2046},
 [0x2046]={d='on', m=0x2045},
 [0x2047]={d='on'},
 [0x2048]={d='on'},
 [0x2049]={d='on'},
 [0x204A]={d='on'},
 [0x204B]={d='on'},
 [0x204C]={d='on'},
 [0x204D]={d='on'},
 [0x204E]={d='on'},
 [0x204F]={d='on'},
 [0x2050]={d='on'},
 [0x2051]={d='on'},
 [0x2052]={d='on'},
 [0x2053]={d='on'},
 [0x2054]={d='on'},
 [0x2055]={d='on'},
 [0x2056]={d='on'},
 [0x2057]={d='on'},
 [0x2058]={d='on'},
 [0x2059]={d='on'},
 [0x205A]={d='on'},
 [0x205B]={d='on'},
 [0x205C]={d='on'},
 [0x205D]={d='on'},
 [0x205E]={d='on'},
 [0x205F]={d='ws'},
 [0x2060]={d='bn'},
 [0x2061]={d='bn'},
 [0x2062]={d='bn'},
 [0x2063]={d='bn'},
 [0x2064]={d='bn'},
 [0x2066]={d='lri'},
 [0x2067]={d='rli'},
 [0x2068]={d='fsi'},
 [0x2069]={d='pdi'},
 [0x206A]={d='bn'},
 [0x206B]={d='bn'},
 [0x206C]={d='bn'},
 [0x206D]={d='bn'},
 [0x206E]={d='bn'},
 [0x206F]={d='bn'},
 [0x2070]={d='en'},
 [0x2074]={d='en'},
 [0x2075]={d='en'},
 [0x2076]={d='en'},
 [0x2077]={d='en'},
 [0x2078]={d='en'},
 [0x2079]={d='en'},
 [0x207A]={d='es'},
 [0x207B]={d='es'},
 [0x207C]={d='on'},
 [0x207D]={d='on', m=0x207E},
 [0x207E]={d='on', m=0x207D},
 [0x2080]={d='en'},
 [0x2081]={d='en'},
 [0x2082]={d='en'},
 [0x2083]={d='en'},
 [0x2084]={d='en'},
 [0x2085]={d='en'},
 [0x2086]={d='en'},
 [0x2087]={d='en'},
 [0x2088]={d='en'},
 [0x2089]={d='en'},
 [0x208A]={d='es'},
 [0x208B]={d='es'},
 [0x208C]={d='on'},
 [0x208D]={d='on', m=0x208E},
 [0x208E]={d='on', m=0x208D},
 [0x20A0]={d='et'},
 [0x20A1]={d='et'},
 [0x20A2]={d='et'},
 [0x20A3]={d='et'},
 [0x20A4]={d='et'},
 [0x20A5]={d='et'},
 [0x20A6]={d='et'},
 [0x20A7]={d='et'},
 [0x20A8]={d='et'},
 [0x20A9]={d='et'},
 [0x20AA]={d='et'},
 [0x20AB]={d='et'},
 [0x20AC]={d='et'},
 [0x20AD]={d='et'},
 [0x20AE]={d='et'},
 [0x20AF]={d='et'},
 [0x20B0]={d='et'},
 [0x20B1]={d='et'},
 [0x20B2]={d='et'},
 [0x20B3]={d='et'},
 [0x20B4]={d='et'},
 [0x20B5]={d='et'},
 [0x20B6]={d='et'},
 [0x20B7]={d='et'},
 [0x20B8]={d='et'},
 [0x20B9]={d='et'},
 [0x20BA]={d='et'},
 [0x20BB]={d='et'},
 [0x20BC]={d='et'},
 [0x20BD]={d='et'},
 [0x20BE]={d='et'},
 [0x20D0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20D9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20DA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20DB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20DC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20DD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20DE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20DF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20E9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20EA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20EB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20EC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20ED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20EE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20EF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x20F0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2100]={d='on'},
 [0x2101]={d='on'},
 [0x2103]={d='on'},
 [0x2104]={d='on'},
 [0x2105]={d='on'},
 [0x2106]={d='on'},
 [0x2108]={d='on'},
 [0x2109]={d='on'},
 [0x2114]={d='on'},
 [0x2116]={d='on'},
 [0x2117]={d='on'},
 [0x2118]={d='on'},
 [0x211E]={d='on'},
 [0x211F]={d='on'},
 [0x2120]={d='on'},
 [0x2121]={d='on'},
 [0x2122]={d='on'},
 [0x2123]={d='on'},
 [0x2125]={d='on'},
 [0x2127]={d='on'},
 [0x2129]={d='on'},
 [0x212E]={d='et'},
 [0x213A]={d='on'},
 [0x213B]={d='on'},
 [0x2140]={d='on'},
 [0x2141]={d='on'},
 [0x2142]={d='on'},
 [0x2143]={d='on'},
 [0x2144]={d='on'},
 [0x214A]={d='on'},
 [0x214B]={d='on'},
 [0x214C]={d='on'},
 [0x214D]={d='on'},
 [0x2150]={d='on'},
 [0x2151]={d='on'},
 [0x2152]={d='on'},
 [0x2153]={d='on'},
 [0x2154]={d='on'},
 [0x2155]={d='on'},
 [0x2156]={d='on'},
 [0x2157]={d='on'},
 [0x2158]={d='on'},
 [0x2159]={d='on'},
 [0x215A]={d='on'},
 [0x215B]={d='on'},
 [0x215C]={d='on'},
 [0x215D]={d='on'},
 [0x215E]={d='on'},
 [0x215F]={d='on'},
 [0x2189]={d='on'},
 [0x218A]={d='on'},
 [0x218B]={d='on'},
 [0x2190]={d='on'},
 [0x2191]={d='on'},
 [0x2192]={d='on'},
 [0x2193]={d='on'},
 [0x2194]={d='on'},
 [0x2195]={d='on'},
 [0x2196]={d='on'},
 [0x2197]={d='on'},
 [0x2198]={d='on'},
 [0x2199]={d='on'},
 [0x219A]={d='on'},
 [0x219B]={d='on'},
 [0x219C]={d='on'},
 [0x219D]={d='on'},
 [0x219E]={d='on'},
 [0x219F]={d='on'},
 [0x21A0]={d='on'},
 [0x21A1]={d='on'},
 [0x21A2]={d='on'},
 [0x21A3]={d='on'},
 [0x21A4]={d='on'},
 [0x21A5]={d='on'},
 [0x21A6]={d='on'},
 [0x21A7]={d='on'},
 [0x21A8]={d='on'},
 [0x21A9]={d='on'},
 [0x21AA]={d='on'},
 [0x21AB]={d='on'},
 [0x21AC]={d='on'},
 [0x21AD]={d='on'},
 [0x21AE]={d='on'},
 [0x21AF]={d='on'},
 [0x21B0]={d='on'},
 [0x21B1]={d='on'},
 [0x21B2]={d='on'},
 [0x21B3]={d='on'},
 [0x21B4]={d='on'},
 [0x21B5]={d='on'},
 [0x21B6]={d='on'},
 [0x21B7]={d='on'},
 [0x21B8]={d='on'},
 [0x21B9]={d='on'},
 [0x21BA]={d='on'},
 [0x21BB]={d='on'},
 [0x21BC]={d='on'},
 [0x21BD]={d='on'},
 [0x21BE]={d='on'},
 [0x21BF]={d='on'},
 [0x21C0]={d='on'},
 [0x21C1]={d='on'},
 [0x21C2]={d='on'},
 [0x21C3]={d='on'},
 [0x21C4]={d='on'},
 [0x21C5]={d='on'},
 [0x21C6]={d='on'},
 [0x21C7]={d='on'},
 [0x21C8]={d='on'},
 [0x21C9]={d='on'},
 [0x21CA]={d='on'},
 [0x21CB]={d='on'},
 [0x21CC]={d='on'},
 [0x21CD]={d='on'},
 [0x21CE]={d='on'},
 [0x21CF]={d='on'},
 [0x21D0]={d='on'},
 [0x21D1]={d='on'},
 [0x21D2]={d='on'},
 [0x21D3]={d='on'},
 [0x21D4]={d='on'},
 [0x21D5]={d='on'},
 [0x21D6]={d='on'},
 [0x21D7]={d='on'},
 [0x21D8]={d='on'},
 [0x21D9]={d='on'},
 [0x21DA]={d='on'},
 [0x21DB]={d='on'},
 [0x21DC]={d='on'},
 [0x21DD]={d='on'},
 [0x21DE]={d='on'},
 [0x21DF]={d='on'},
 [0x21E0]={d='on'},
 [0x21E1]={d='on'},
 [0x21E2]={d='on'},
 [0x21E3]={d='on'},
 [0x21E4]={d='on'},
 [0x21E5]={d='on'},
 [0x21E6]={d='on'},
 [0x21E7]={d='on'},
 [0x21E8]={d='on'},
 [0x21E9]={d='on'},
 [0x21EA]={d='on'},
 [0x21EB]={d='on'},
 [0x21EC]={d='on'},
 [0x21ED]={d='on'},
 [0x21EE]={d='on'},
 [0x21EF]={d='on'},
 [0x21F0]={d='on'},
 [0x21F1]={d='on'},
 [0x21F2]={d='on'},
 [0x21F3]={d='on'},
 [0x21F4]={d='on'},
 [0x21F5]={d='on'},
 [0x21F6]={d='on'},
 [0x21F7]={d='on'},
 [0x21F8]={d='on'},
 [0x21F9]={d='on'},
 [0x21FA]={d='on'},
 [0x21FB]={d='on'},
 [0x21FC]={d='on'},
 [0x21FD]={d='on'},
 [0x21FE]={d='on'},
 [0x21FF]={d='on'},
 [0x2200]={d='on'},
 [0x2201]={d='on'},
 [0x2202]={d='on'},
 [0x2203]={d='on'},
 [0x2204]={d='on'},
 [0x2205]={d='on'},
 [0x2206]={d='on'},
 [0x2207]={d='on'},
 [0x2208]={d='on', m=0x220B},
 [0x2209]={d='on', m=0x220C},
 [0x220A]={d='on', m=0x220D},
 [0x220B]={d='on', m=0x2208},
 [0x220C]={d='on', m=0x2209},
 [0x220D]={d='on', m=0x220A},
 [0x220E]={d='on'},
 [0x220F]={d='on'},
 [0x2210]={d='on'},
 [0x2211]={d='on'},
 [0x2212]={d='es'},
 [0x2213]={d='et'},
 [0x2214]={d='on'},
 [0x2215]={d='on', m=0x29F5},
 [0x2216]={d='on'},
 [0x2217]={d='on'},
 [0x2218]={d='on'},
 [0x2219]={d='on'},
 [0x221A]={d='on'},
 [0x221B]={d='on'},
 [0x221C]={d='on'},
 [0x221D]={d='on'},
 [0x221E]={d='on'},
 [0x221F]={d='on'},
 [0x2220]={d='on'},
 [0x2221]={d='on'},
 [0x2222]={d='on'},
 [0x2223]={d='on'},
 [0x2224]={d='on'},
 [0x2225]={d='on'},
 [0x2226]={d='on'},
 [0x2227]={d='on'},
 [0x2228]={d='on'},
 [0x2229]={d='on'},
 [0x222A]={d='on'},
 [0x222B]={d='on'},
 [0x222C]={d='on'},
 [0x222D]={d='on'},
 [0x222E]={d='on'},
 [0x222F]={d='on'},
 [0x2230]={d='on'},
 [0x2231]={d='on'},
 [0x2232]={d='on'},
 [0x2233]={d='on'},
 [0x2234]={d='on'},
 [0x2235]={d='on'},
 [0x2236]={d='on'},
 [0x2237]={d='on'},
 [0x2238]={d='on'},
 [0x2239]={d='on'},
 [0x223A]={d='on'},
 [0x223B]={d='on'},
 [0x223C]={d='on', m=0x223D},
 [0x223D]={d='on', m=0x223C},
 [0x223E]={d='on'},
 [0x223F]={d='on'},
 [0x2240]={d='on'},
 [0x2241]={d='on'},
 [0x2242]={d='on'},
 [0x2243]={d='on', m=0x22CD},
 [0x2244]={d='on'},
 [0x2245]={d='on'},
 [0x2246]={d='on'},
 [0x2247]={d='on'},
 [0x2248]={d='on'},
 [0x2249]={d='on'},
 [0x224A]={d='on'},
 [0x224B]={d='on'},
 [0x224C]={d='on'},
 [0x224D]={d='on'},
 [0x224E]={d='on'},
 [0x224F]={d='on'},
 [0x2250]={d='on'},
 [0x2251]={d='on'},
 [0x2252]={d='on', m=0x2253},
 [0x2253]={d='on', m=0x2252},
 [0x2254]={d='on', m=0x2255},
 [0x2255]={d='on', m=0x2254},
 [0x2256]={d='on'},
 [0x2257]={d='on'},
 [0x2258]={d='on'},
 [0x2259]={d='on'},
 [0x225A]={d='on'},
 [0x225B]={d='on'},
 [0x225C]={d='on'},
 [0x225D]={d='on'},
 [0x225E]={d='on'},
 [0x225F]={d='on'},
 [0x2260]={d='on'},
 [0x2261]={d='on'},
 [0x2262]={d='on'},
 [0x2263]={d='on'},
 [0x2264]={d='on', m=0x2265},
 [0x2265]={d='on', m=0x2264},
 [0x2266]={d='on', m=0x2267},
 [0x2267]={d='on', m=0x2266},
 [0x2268]={d='on', m=0x2269},
 [0x2269]={d='on', m=0x2268},
 [0x226A]={d='on', m=0x226B},
 [0x226B]={d='on', m=0x226A},
 [0x226C]={d='on'},
 [0x226D]={d='on'},
 [0x226E]={d='on', m=0x226F},
 [0x226F]={d='on', m=0x226E},
 [0x2270]={d='on', m=0x2271},
 [0x2271]={d='on', m=0x2270},
 [0x2272]={d='on', m=0x2273},
 [0x2273]={d='on', m=0x2272},
 [0x2274]={d='on', m=0x2275},
 [0x2275]={d='on', m=0x2274},
 [0x2276]={d='on', m=0x2277},
 [0x2277]={d='on', m=0x2276},
 [0x2278]={d='on', m=0x2279},
 [0x2279]={d='on', m=0x2278},
 [0x227A]={d='on', m=0x227B},
 [0x227B]={d='on', m=0x227A},
 [0x227C]={d='on', m=0x227D},
 [0x227D]={d='on', m=0x227C},
 [0x227E]={d='on', m=0x227F},
 [0x227F]={d='on', m=0x227E},
 [0x2280]={d='on', m=0x2281},
 [0x2281]={d='on', m=0x2280},
 [0x2282]={d='on', m=0x2283},
 [0x2283]={d='on', m=0x2282},
 [0x2284]={d='on', m=0x2285},
 [0x2285]={d='on', m=0x2284},
 [0x2286]={d='on', m=0x2287},
 [0x2287]={d='on', m=0x2286},
 [0x2288]={d='on', m=0x2289},
 [0x2289]={d='on', m=0x2288},
 [0x228A]={d='on', m=0x228B},
 [0x228B]={d='on', m=0x228A},
 [0x228C]={d='on'},
 [0x228D]={d='on'},
 [0x228E]={d='on'},
 [0x228F]={d='on', m=0x2290},
 [0x2290]={d='on', m=0x228F},
 [0x2291]={d='on', m=0x2292},
 [0x2292]={d='on', m=0x2291},
 [0x2293]={d='on'},
 [0x2294]={d='on'},
 [0x2295]={d='on'},
 [0x2296]={d='on'},
 [0x2297]={d='on'},
 [0x2298]={d='on', m=0x29B8},
 [0x2299]={d='on'},
 [0x229A]={d='on'},
 [0x229B]={d='on'},
 [0x229C]={d='on'},
 [0x229D]={d='on'},
 [0x229E]={d='on'},
 [0x229F]={d='on'},
 [0x22A0]={d='on'},
 [0x22A1]={d='on'},
 [0x22A2]={d='on', m=0x22A3},
 [0x22A3]={d='on', m=0x22A2},
 [0x22A4]={d='on'},
 [0x22A5]={d='on'},
 [0x22A6]={d='on', m=0x2ADE},
 [0x22A7]={d='on'},
 [0x22A8]={d='on', m=0x2AE4},
 [0x22A9]={d='on', m=0x2AE3},
 [0x22AA]={d='on'},
 [0x22AB]={d='on', m=0x2AE5},
 [0x22AC]={d='on'},
 [0x22AD]={d='on'},
 [0x22AE]={d='on'},
 [0x22AF]={d='on'},
 [0x22B0]={d='on', m=0x22B1},
 [0x22B1]={d='on', m=0x22B0},
 [0x22B2]={d='on', m=0x22B3},
 [0x22B3]={d='on', m=0x22B2},
 [0x22B4]={d='on', m=0x22B5},
 [0x22B5]={d='on', m=0x22B4},
 [0x22B6]={d='on', m=0x22B7},
 [0x22B7]={d='on', m=0x22B6},
 [0x22B8]={d='on'},
 [0x22B9]={d='on'},
 [0x22BA]={d='on'},
 [0x22BB]={d='on'},
 [0x22BC]={d='on'},
 [0x22BD]={d='on'},
 [0x22BE]={d='on'},
 [0x22BF]={d='on'},
 [0x22C0]={d='on'},
 [0x22C1]={d='on'},
 [0x22C2]={d='on'},
 [0x22C3]={d='on'},
 [0x22C4]={d='on'},
 [0x22C5]={d='on'},
 [0x22C6]={d='on'},
 [0x22C7]={d='on'},
 [0x22C8]={d='on'},
 [0x22C9]={d='on', m=0x22CA},
 [0x22CA]={d='on', m=0x22C9},
 [0x22CB]={d='on', m=0x22CC},
 [0x22CC]={d='on', m=0x22CB},
 [0x22CD]={d='on', m=0x2243},
 [0x22CE]={d='on'},
 [0x22CF]={d='on'},
 [0x22D0]={d='on', m=0x22D1},
 [0x22D1]={d='on', m=0x22D0},
 [0x22D2]={d='on'},
 [0x22D3]={d='on'},
 [0x22D4]={d='on'},
 [0x22D5]={d='on'},
 [0x22D6]={d='on', m=0x22D7},
 [0x22D7]={d='on', m=0x22D6},
 [0x22D8]={d='on', m=0x22D9},
 [0x22D9]={d='on', m=0x22D8},
 [0x22DA]={d='on', m=0x22DB},
 [0x22DB]={d='on', m=0x22DA},
 [0x22DC]={d='on', m=0x22DD},
 [0x22DD]={d='on', m=0x22DC},
 [0x22DE]={d='on', m=0x22DF},
 [0x22DF]={d='on', m=0x22DE},
 [0x22E0]={d='on', m=0x22E1},
 [0x22E1]={d='on', m=0x22E0},
 [0x22E2]={d='on', m=0x22E3},
 [0x22E3]={d='on', m=0x22E2},
 [0x22E4]={d='on', m=0x22E5},
 [0x22E5]={d='on', m=0x22E4},
 [0x22E6]={d='on', m=0x22E7},
 [0x22E7]={d='on', m=0x22E6},
 [0x22E8]={d='on', m=0x22E9},
 [0x22E9]={d='on', m=0x22E8},
 [0x22EA]={d='on', m=0x22EB},
 [0x22EB]={d='on', m=0x22EA},
 [0x22EC]={d='on', m=0x22ED},
 [0x22ED]={d='on', m=0x22EC},
 [0x22EE]={d='on'},
 [0x22EF]={d='on'},
 [0x22F0]={d='on', m=0x22F1},
 [0x22F1]={d='on', m=0x22F0},
 [0x22F2]={d='on', m=0x22FA},
 [0x22F3]={d='on', m=0x22FB},
 [0x22F4]={d='on', m=0x22FC},
 [0x22F5]={d='on'},
 [0x22F6]={d='on', m=0x22FD},
 [0x22F7]={d='on', m=0x22FE},
 [0x22F8]={d='on'},
 [0x22F9]={d='on'},
 [0x22FA]={d='on', m=0x22F2},
 [0x22FB]={d='on', m=0x22F3},
 [0x22FC]={d='on', m=0x22F4},
 [0x22FD]={d='on', m=0x22F6},
 [0x22FE]={d='on', m=0x22F7},
 [0x22FF]={d='on'},
 [0x2300]={d='on'},
 [0x2301]={d='on'},
 [0x2302]={d='on'},
 [0x2303]={d='on'},
 [0x2304]={d='on'},
 [0x2305]={d='on'},
 [0x2306]={d='on'},
 [0x2307]={d='on'},
 [0x2308]={d='on', m=0x2309},
 [0x2309]={d='on', m=0x2308},
 [0x230A]={d='on', m=0x230B},
 [0x230B]={d='on', m=0x230A},
 [0x230C]={d='on'},
 [0x230D]={d='on'},
 [0x230E]={d='on'},
 [0x230F]={d='on'},
 [0x2310]={d='on'},
 [0x2311]={d='on'},
 [0x2312]={d='on'},
 [0x2313]={d='on'},
 [0x2314]={d='on'},
 [0x2315]={d='on'},
 [0x2316]={d='on'},
 [0x2317]={d='on'},
 [0x2318]={d='on'},
 [0x2319]={d='on'},
 [0x231A]={d='on'},
 [0x231B]={d='on'},
 [0x231C]={d='on'},
 [0x231D]={d='on'},
 [0x231E]={d='on'},
 [0x231F]={d='on'},
 [0x2320]={d='on'},
 [0x2321]={d='on'},
 [0x2322]={d='on'},
 [0x2323]={d='on'},
 [0x2324]={d='on'},
 [0x2325]={d='on'},
 [0x2326]={d='on'},
 [0x2327]={d='on'},
 [0x2328]={d='on'},
 [0x2329]={d='on', m=0x232A},
 [0x232A]={d='on', m=0x2329},
 [0x232B]={d='on'},
 [0x232C]={d='on'},
 [0x232D]={d='on'},
 [0x232E]={d='on'},
 [0x232F]={d='on'},
 [0x2330]={d='on'},
 [0x2331]={d='on'},
 [0x2332]={d='on'},
 [0x2333]={d='on'},
 [0x2334]={d='on'},
 [0x2335]={d='on'},
 [0x237B]={d='on'},
 [0x237C]={d='on'},
 [0x237D]={d='on'},
 [0x237E]={d='on'},
 [0x237F]={d='on'},
 [0x2380]={d='on'},
 [0x2381]={d='on'},
 [0x2382]={d='on'},
 [0x2383]={d='on'},
 [0x2384]={d='on'},
 [0x2385]={d='on'},
 [0x2386]={d='on'},
 [0x2387]={d='on'},
 [0x2388]={d='on'},
 [0x2389]={d='on'},
 [0x238A]={d='on'},
 [0x238B]={d='on'},
 [0x238C]={d='on'},
 [0x238D]={d='on'},
 [0x238E]={d='on'},
 [0x238F]={d='on'},
 [0x2390]={d='on'},
 [0x2391]={d='on'},
 [0x2392]={d='on'},
 [0x2393]={d='on'},
 [0x2394]={d='on'},
 [0x2396]={d='on'},
 [0x2397]={d='on'},
 [0x2398]={d='on'},
 [0x2399]={d='on'},
 [0x239A]={d='on'},
 [0x239B]={d='on'},
 [0x239C]={d='on'},
 [0x239D]={d='on'},
 [0x239E]={d='on'},
 [0x239F]={d='on'},
 [0x23A0]={d='on'},
 [0x23A1]={d='on'},
 [0x23A2]={d='on'},
 [0x23A3]={d='on'},
 [0x23A4]={d='on'},
 [0x23A5]={d='on'},
 [0x23A6]={d='on'},
 [0x23A7]={d='on'},
 [0x23A8]={d='on'},
 [0x23A9]={d='on'},
 [0x23AA]={d='on'},
 [0x23AB]={d='on'},
 [0x23AC]={d='on'},
 [0x23AD]={d='on'},
 [0x23AE]={d='on'},
 [0x23AF]={d='on'},
 [0x23B0]={d='on'},
 [0x23B1]={d='on'},
 [0x23B2]={d='on'},
 [0x23B3]={d='on'},
 [0x23B4]={d='on'},
 [0x23B5]={d='on'},
 [0x23B6]={d='on'},
 [0x23B7]={d='on'},
 [0x23B8]={d='on'},
 [0x23B9]={d='on'},
 [0x23BA]={d='on'},
 [0x23BB]={d='on'},
 [0x23BC]={d='on'},
 [0x23BD]={d='on'},
 [0x23BE]={d='on'},
 [0x23BF]={d='on'},
 [0x23C0]={d='on'},
 [0x23C1]={d='on'},
 [0x23C2]={d='on'},
 [0x23C3]={d='on'},
 [0x23C4]={d='on'},
 [0x23C5]={d='on'},
 [0x23C6]={d='on'},
 [0x23C7]={d='on'},
 [0x23C8]={d='on'},
 [0x23C9]={d='on'},
 [0x23CA]={d='on'},
 [0x23CB]={d='on'},
 [0x23CC]={d='on'},
 [0x23CD]={d='on'},
 [0x23CE]={d='on'},
 [0x23CF]={d='on'},
 [0x23D0]={d='on'},
 [0x23D1]={d='on'},
 [0x23D2]={d='on'},
 [0x23D3]={d='on'},
 [0x23D4]={d='on'},
 [0x23D5]={d='on'},
 [0x23D6]={d='on'},
 [0x23D7]={d='on'},
 [0x23D8]={d='on'},
 [0x23D9]={d='on'},
 [0x23DA]={d='on'},
 [0x23DB]={d='on'},
 [0x23DC]={d='on'},
 [0x23DD]={d='on'},
 [0x23DE]={d='on'},
 [0x23DF]={d='on'},
 [0x23E0]={d='on'},
 [0x23E1]={d='on'},
 [0x23E2]={d='on'},
 [0x23E3]={d='on'},
 [0x23E4]={d='on'},
 [0x23E5]={d='on'},
 [0x23E6]={d='on'},
 [0x23E7]={d='on'},
 [0x23E8]={d='on'},
 [0x23E9]={d='on'},
 [0x23EA]={d='on'},
 [0x23EB]={d='on'},
 [0x23EC]={d='on'},
 [0x23ED]={d='on'},
 [0x23EE]={d='on'},
 [0x23EF]={d='on'},
 [0x23F0]={d='on'},
 [0x23F1]={d='on'},
 [0x23F2]={d='on'},
 [0x23F3]={d='on'},
 [0x23F4]={d='on'},
 [0x23F5]={d='on'},
 [0x23F6]={d='on'},
 [0x23F7]={d='on'},
 [0x23F8]={d='on'},
 [0x23F9]={d='on'},
 [0x23FA]={d='on'},
 [0x23FB]={d='on'},
 [0x23FC]={d='on'},
 [0x23FD]={d='on'},
 [0x23FE]={d='on'},
 [0x2400]={d='on'},
 [0x2401]={d='on'},
 [0x2402]={d='on'},
 [0x2403]={d='on'},
 [0x2404]={d='on'},
 [0x2405]={d='on'},
 [0x2406]={d='on'},
 [0x2407]={d='on'},
 [0x2408]={d='on'},
 [0x2409]={d='on'},
 [0x240A]={d='on'},
 [0x240B]={d='on'},
 [0x240C]={d='on'},
 [0x240D]={d='on'},
 [0x240E]={d='on'},
 [0x240F]={d='on'},
 [0x2410]={d='on'},
 [0x2411]={d='on'},
 [0x2412]={d='on'},
 [0x2413]={d='on'},
 [0x2414]={d='on'},
 [0x2415]={d='on'},
 [0x2416]={d='on'},
 [0x2417]={d='on'},
 [0x2418]={d='on'},
 [0x2419]={d='on'},
 [0x241A]={d='on'},
 [0x241B]={d='on'},
 [0x241C]={d='on'},
 [0x241D]={d='on'},
 [0x241E]={d='on'},
 [0x241F]={d='on'},
 [0x2420]={d='on'},
 [0x2421]={d='on'},
 [0x2422]={d='on'},
 [0x2423]={d='on'},
 [0x2424]={d='on'},
 [0x2425]={d='on'},
 [0x2426]={d='on'},
 [0x2440]={d='on'},
 [0x2441]={d='on'},
 [0x2442]={d='on'},
 [0x2443]={d='on'},
 [0x2444]={d='on'},
 [0x2445]={d='on'},
 [0x2446]={d='on'},
 [0x2447]={d='on'},
 [0x2448]={d='on'},
 [0x2449]={d='on'},
 [0x244A]={d='on'},
 [0x2460]={d='on'},
 [0x2461]={d='on'},
 [0x2462]={d='on'},
 [0x2463]={d='on'},
 [0x2464]={d='on'},
 [0x2465]={d='on'},
 [0x2466]={d='on'},
 [0x2467]={d='on'},
 [0x2468]={d='on'},
 [0x2469]={d='on'},
 [0x246A]={d='on'},
 [0x246B]={d='on'},
 [0x246C]={d='on'},
 [0x246D]={d='on'},
 [0x246E]={d='on'},
 [0x246F]={d='on'},
 [0x2470]={d='on'},
 [0x2471]={d='on'},
 [0x2472]={d='on'},
 [0x2473]={d='on'},
 [0x2474]={d='on'},
 [0x2475]={d='on'},
 [0x2476]={d='on'},
 [0x2477]={d='on'},
 [0x2478]={d='on'},
 [0x2479]={d='on'},
 [0x247A]={d='on'},
 [0x247B]={d='on'},
 [0x247C]={d='on'},
 [0x247D]={d='on'},
 [0x247E]={d='on'},
 [0x247F]={d='on'},
 [0x2480]={d='on'},
 [0x2481]={d='on'},
 [0x2482]={d='on'},
 [0x2483]={d='on'},
 [0x2484]={d='on'},
 [0x2485]={d='on'},
 [0x2486]={d='on'},
 [0x2487]={d='on'},
 [0x2488]={d='en'},
 [0x2489]={d='en'},
 [0x248A]={d='en'},
 [0x248B]={d='en'},
 [0x248C]={d='en'},
 [0x248D]={d='en'},
 [0x248E]={d='en'},
 [0x248F]={d='en'},
 [0x2490]={d='en'},
 [0x2491]={d='en'},
 [0x2492]={d='en'},
 [0x2493]={d='en'},
 [0x2494]={d='en'},
 [0x2495]={d='en'},
 [0x2496]={d='en'},
 [0x2497]={d='en'},
 [0x2498]={d='en'},
 [0x2499]={d='en'},
 [0x249A]={d='en'},
 [0x249B]={d='en'},
 [0x24EA]={d='on'},
 [0x24EB]={d='on'},
 [0x24EC]={d='on'},
 [0x24ED]={d='on'},
 [0x24EE]={d='on'},
 [0x24EF]={d='on'},
 [0x24F0]={d='on'},
 [0x24F1]={d='on'},
 [0x24F2]={d='on'},
 [0x24F3]={d='on'},
 [0x24F4]={d='on'},
 [0x24F5]={d='on'},
 [0x24F6]={d='on'},
 [0x24F7]={d='on'},
 [0x24F8]={d='on'},
 [0x24F9]={d='on'},
 [0x24FA]={d='on'},
 [0x24FB]={d='on'},
 [0x24FC]={d='on'},
 [0x24FD]={d='on'},
 [0x24FE]={d='on'},
 [0x24FF]={d='on'},
 [0x2500]={d='on'},
 [0x2501]={d='on'},
 [0x2502]={d='on'},
 [0x2503]={d='on'},
 [0x2504]={d='on'},
 [0x2505]={d='on'},
 [0x2506]={d='on'},
 [0x2507]={d='on'},
 [0x2508]={d='on'},
 [0x2509]={d='on'},
 [0x250A]={d='on'},
 [0x250B]={d='on'},
 [0x250C]={d='on'},
 [0x250D]={d='on'},
 [0x250E]={d='on'},
 [0x250F]={d='on'},
 [0x2510]={d='on'},
 [0x2511]={d='on'},
 [0x2512]={d='on'},
 [0x2513]={d='on'},
 [0x2514]={d='on'},
 [0x2515]={d='on'},
 [0x2516]={d='on'},
 [0x2517]={d='on'},
 [0x2518]={d='on'},
 [0x2519]={d='on'},
 [0x251A]={d='on'},
 [0x251B]={d='on'},
 [0x251C]={d='on'},
 [0x251D]={d='on'},
 [0x251E]={d='on'},
 [0x251F]={d='on'},
 [0x2520]={d='on'},
 [0x2521]={d='on'},
 [0x2522]={d='on'},
 [0x2523]={d='on'},
 [0x2524]={d='on'},
 [0x2525]={d='on'},
 [0x2526]={d='on'},
 [0x2527]={d='on'},
 [0x2528]={d='on'},
 [0x2529]={d='on'},
 [0x252A]={d='on'},
 [0x252B]={d='on'},
 [0x252C]={d='on'},
 [0x252D]={d='on'},
 [0x252E]={d='on'},
 [0x252F]={d='on'},
 [0x2530]={d='on'},
 [0x2531]={d='on'},
 [0x2532]={d='on'},
 [0x2533]={d='on'},
 [0x2534]={d='on'},
 [0x2535]={d='on'},
 [0x2536]={d='on'},
 [0x2537]={d='on'},
 [0x2538]={d='on'},
 [0x2539]={d='on'},
 [0x253A]={d='on'},
 [0x253B]={d='on'},
 [0x253C]={d='on'},
 [0x253D]={d='on'},
 [0x253E]={d='on'},
 [0x253F]={d='on'},
 [0x2540]={d='on'},
 [0x2541]={d='on'},
 [0x2542]={d='on'},
 [0x2543]={d='on'},
 [0x2544]={d='on'},
 [0x2545]={d='on'},
 [0x2546]={d='on'},
 [0x2547]={d='on'},
 [0x2548]={d='on'},
 [0x2549]={d='on'},
 [0x254A]={d='on'},
 [0x254B]={d='on'},
 [0x254C]={d='on'},
 [0x254D]={d='on'},
 [0x254E]={d='on'},
 [0x254F]={d='on'},
 [0x2550]={d='on'},
 [0x2551]={d='on'},
 [0x2552]={d='on'},
 [0x2553]={d='on'},
 [0x2554]={d='on'},
 [0x2555]={d='on'},
 [0x2556]={d='on'},
 [0x2557]={d='on'},
 [0x2558]={d='on'},
 [0x2559]={d='on'},
 [0x255A]={d='on'},
 [0x255B]={d='on'},
 [0x255C]={d='on'},
 [0x255D]={d='on'},
 [0x255E]={d='on'},
 [0x255F]={d='on'},
 [0x2560]={d='on'},
 [0x2561]={d='on'},
 [0x2562]={d='on'},
 [0x2563]={d='on'},
 [0x2564]={d='on'},
 [0x2565]={d='on'},
 [0x2566]={d='on'},
 [0x2567]={d='on'},
 [0x2568]={d='on'},
 [0x2569]={d='on'},
 [0x256A]={d='on'},
 [0x256B]={d='on'},
 [0x256C]={d='on'},
 [0x256D]={d='on'},
 [0x256E]={d='on'},
 [0x256F]={d='on'},
 [0x2570]={d='on'},
 [0x2571]={d='on'},
 [0x2572]={d='on'},
 [0x2573]={d='on'},
 [0x2574]={d='on'},
 [0x2575]={d='on'},
 [0x2576]={d='on'},
 [0x2577]={d='on'},
 [0x2578]={d='on'},
 [0x2579]={d='on'},
 [0x257A]={d='on'},
 [0x257B]={d='on'},
 [0x257C]={d='on'},
 [0x257D]={d='on'},
 [0x257E]={d='on'},
 [0x257F]={d='on'},
 [0x2580]={d='on'},
 [0x2581]={d='on'},
 [0x2582]={d='on'},
 [0x2583]={d='on'},
 [0x2584]={d='on'},
 [0x2585]={d='on'},
 [0x2586]={d='on'},
 [0x2587]={d='on'},
 [0x2588]={d='on'},
 [0x2589]={d='on'},
 [0x258A]={d='on'},
 [0x258B]={d='on'},
 [0x258C]={d='on'},
 [0x258D]={d='on'},
 [0x258E]={d='on'},
 [0x258F]={d='on'},
 [0x2590]={d='on'},
 [0x2591]={d='on'},
 [0x2592]={d='on'},
 [0x2593]={d='on'},
 [0x2594]={d='on'},
 [0x2595]={d='on'},
 [0x2596]={d='on'},
 [0x2597]={d='on'},
 [0x2598]={d='on'},
 [0x2599]={d='on'},
 [0x259A]={d='on'},
 [0x259B]={d='on'},
 [0x259C]={d='on'},
 [0x259D]={d='on'},
 [0x259E]={d='on'},
 [0x259F]={d='on'},
 [0x25A0]={d='on'},
 [0x25A1]={d='on'},
 [0x25A2]={d='on'},
 [0x25A3]={d='on'},
 [0x25A4]={d='on'},
 [0x25A5]={d='on'},
 [0x25A6]={d='on'},
 [0x25A7]={d='on'},
 [0x25A8]={d='on'},
 [0x25A9]={d='on'},
 [0x25AA]={d='on'},
 [0x25AB]={d='on'},
 [0x25AC]={d='on'},
 [0x25AD]={d='on'},
 [0x25AE]={d='on'},
 [0x25AF]={d='on'},
 [0x25B0]={d='on'},
 [0x25B1]={d='on'},
 [0x25B2]={d='on'},
 [0x25B3]={d='on'},
 [0x25B4]={d='on'},
 [0x25B5]={d='on'},
 [0x25B6]={d='on'},
 [0x25B7]={d='on'},
 [0x25B8]={d='on'},
 [0x25B9]={d='on'},
 [0x25BA]={d='on'},
 [0x25BB]={d='on'},
 [0x25BC]={d='on'},
 [0x25BD]={d='on'},
 [0x25BE]={d='on'},
 [0x25BF]={d='on'},
 [0x25C0]={d='on'},
 [0x25C1]={d='on'},
 [0x25C2]={d='on'},
 [0x25C3]={d='on'},
 [0x25C4]={d='on'},
 [0x25C5]={d='on'},
 [0x25C6]={d='on'},
 [0x25C7]={d='on'},
 [0x25C8]={d='on'},
 [0x25C9]={d='on'},
 [0x25CA]={d='on'},
 [0x25CB]={d='on'},
 [0x25CC]={d='on'},
 [0x25CD]={d='on'},
 [0x25CE]={d='on'},
 [0x25CF]={d='on'},
 [0x25D0]={d='on'},
 [0x25D1]={d='on'},
 [0x25D2]={d='on'},
 [0x25D3]={d='on'},
 [0x25D4]={d='on'},
 [0x25D5]={d='on'},
 [0x25D6]={d='on'},
 [0x25D7]={d='on'},
 [0x25D8]={d='on'},
 [0x25D9]={d='on'},
 [0x25DA]={d='on'},
 [0x25DB]={d='on'},
 [0x25DC]={d='on'},
 [0x25DD]={d='on'},
 [0x25DE]={d='on'},
 [0x25DF]={d='on'},
 [0x25E0]={d='on'},
 [0x25E1]={d='on'},
 [0x25E2]={d='on'},
 [0x25E3]={d='on'},
 [0x25E4]={d='on'},
 [0x25E5]={d='on'},
 [0x25E6]={d='on'},
 [0x25E7]={d='on'},
 [0x25E8]={d='on'},
 [0x25E9]={d='on'},
 [0x25EA]={d='on'},
 [0x25EB]={d='on'},
 [0x25EC]={d='on'},
 [0x25ED]={d='on'},
 [0x25EE]={d='on'},
 [0x25EF]={d='on'},
 [0x25F0]={d='on'},
 [0x25F1]={d='on'},
 [0x25F2]={d='on'},
 [0x25F3]={d='on'},
 [0x25F4]={d='on'},
 [0x25F5]={d='on'},
 [0x25F6]={d='on'},
 [0x25F7]={d='on'},
 [0x25F8]={d='on'},
 [0x25F9]={d='on'},
 [0x25FA]={d='on'},
 [0x25FB]={d='on'},
 [0x25FC]={d='on'},
 [0x25FD]={d='on'},
 [0x25FE]={d='on'},
 [0x25FF]={d='on'},
 [0x2600]={d='on'},
 [0x2601]={d='on'},
 [0x2602]={d='on'},
 [0x2603]={d='on'},
 [0x2604]={d='on'},
 [0x2605]={d='on'},
 [0x2606]={d='on'},
 [0x2607]={d='on'},
 [0x2608]={d='on'},
 [0x2609]={d='on'},
 [0x260A]={d='on'},
 [0x260B]={d='on'},
 [0x260C]={d='on'},
 [0x260D]={d='on'},
 [0x260E]={d='on'},
 [0x260F]={d='on'},
 [0x2610]={d='on'},
 [0x2611]={d='on'},
 [0x2612]={d='on'},
 [0x2613]={d='on'},
 [0x2614]={d='on'},
 [0x2615]={d='on'},
 [0x2616]={d='on'},
 [0x2617]={d='on'},
 [0x2618]={d='on'},
 [0x2619]={d='on'},
 [0x261A]={d='on'},
 [0x261B]={d='on'},
 [0x261C]={d='on'},
 [0x261D]={d='on'},
 [0x261E]={d='on'},
 [0x261F]={d='on'},
 [0x2620]={d='on'},
 [0x2621]={d='on'},
 [0x2622]={d='on'},
 [0x2623]={d='on'},
 [0x2624]={d='on'},
 [0x2625]={d='on'},
 [0x2626]={d='on'},
 [0x2627]={d='on'},
 [0x2628]={d='on'},
 [0x2629]={d='on'},
 [0x262A]={d='on'},
 [0x262B]={d='on'},
 [0x262C]={d='on'},
 [0x262D]={d='on'},
 [0x262E]={d='on'},
 [0x262F]={d='on'},
 [0x2630]={d='on'},
 [0x2631]={d='on'},
 [0x2632]={d='on'},
 [0x2633]={d='on'},
 [0x2634]={d='on'},
 [0x2635]={d='on'},
 [0x2636]={d='on'},
 [0x2637]={d='on'},
 [0x2638]={d='on'},
 [0x2639]={d='on'},
 [0x263A]={d='on'},
 [0x263B]={d='on'},
 [0x263C]={d='on'},
 [0x263D]={d='on'},
 [0x263E]={d='on'},
 [0x263F]={d='on'},
 [0x2640]={d='on'},
 [0x2641]={d='on'},
 [0x2642]={d='on'},
 [0x2643]={d='on'},
 [0x2644]={d='on'},
 [0x2645]={d='on'},
 [0x2646]={d='on'},
 [0x2647]={d='on'},
 [0x2648]={d='on'},
 [0x2649]={d='on'},
 [0x264A]={d='on'},
 [0x264B]={d='on'},
 [0x264C]={d='on'},
 [0x264D]={d='on'},
 [0x264E]={d='on'},
 [0x264F]={d='on'},
 [0x2650]={d='on'},
 [0x2651]={d='on'},
 [0x2652]={d='on'},
 [0x2653]={d='on'},
 [0x2654]={d='on'},
 [0x2655]={d='on'},
 [0x2656]={d='on'},
 [0x2657]={d='on'},
 [0x2658]={d='on'},
 [0x2659]={d='on'},
 [0x265A]={d='on'},
 [0x265B]={d='on'},
 [0x265C]={d='on'},
 [0x265D]={d='on'},
 [0x265E]={d='on'},
 [0x265F]={d='on'},
 [0x2660]={d='on'},
 [0x2661]={d='on'},
 [0x2662]={d='on'},
 [0x2663]={d='on'},
 [0x2664]={d='on'},
 [0x2665]={d='on'},
 [0x2666]={d='on'},
 [0x2667]={d='on'},
 [0x2668]={d='on'},
 [0x2669]={d='on'},
 [0x266A]={d='on'},
 [0x266B]={d='on'},
 [0x266C]={d='on'},
 [0x266D]={d='on'},
 [0x266E]={d='on'},
 [0x266F]={d='on'},
 [0x2670]={d='on'},
 [0x2671]={d='on'},
 [0x2672]={d='on'},
 [0x2673]={d='on'},
 [0x2674]={d='on'},
 [0x2675]={d='on'},
 [0x2676]={d='on'},
 [0x2677]={d='on'},
 [0x2678]={d='on'},
 [0x2679]={d='on'},
 [0x267A]={d='on'},
 [0x267B]={d='on'},
 [0x267C]={d='on'},
 [0x267D]={d='on'},
 [0x267E]={d='on'},
 [0x267F]={d='on'},
 [0x2680]={d='on'},
 [0x2681]={d='on'},
 [0x2682]={d='on'},
 [0x2683]={d='on'},
 [0x2684]={d='on'},
 [0x2685]={d='on'},
 [0x2686]={d='on'},
 [0x2687]={d='on'},
 [0x2688]={d='on'},
 [0x2689]={d='on'},
 [0x268A]={d='on'},
 [0x268B]={d='on'},
 [0x268C]={d='on'},
 [0x268D]={d='on'},
 [0x268E]={d='on'},
 [0x268F]={d='on'},
 [0x2690]={d='on'},
 [0x2691]={d='on'},
 [0x2692]={d='on'},
 [0x2693]={d='on'},
 [0x2694]={d='on'},
 [0x2695]={d='on'},
 [0x2696]={d='on'},
 [0x2697]={d='on'},
 [0x2698]={d='on'},
 [0x2699]={d='on'},
 [0x269A]={d='on'},
 [0x269B]={d='on'},
 [0x269C]={d='on'},
 [0x269D]={d='on'},
 [0x269E]={d='on'},
 [0x269F]={d='on'},
 [0x26A0]={d='on'},
 [0x26A1]={d='on'},
 [0x26A2]={d='on'},
 [0x26A3]={d='on'},
 [0x26A4]={d='on'},
 [0x26A5]={d='on'},
 [0x26A6]={d='on'},
 [0x26A7]={d='on'},
 [0x26A8]={d='on'},
 [0x26A9]={d='on'},
 [0x26AA]={d='on'},
 [0x26AB]={d='on'},
 [0x26AD]={d='on'},
 [0x26AE]={d='on'},
 [0x26AF]={d='on'},
 [0x26B0]={d='on'},
 [0x26B1]={d='on'},
 [0x26B2]={d='on'},
 [0x26B3]={d='on'},
 [0x26B4]={d='on'},
 [0x26B5]={d='on'},
 [0x26B6]={d='on'},
 [0x26B7]={d='on'},
 [0x26B8]={d='on'},
 [0x26B9]={d='on'},
 [0x26BA]={d='on'},
 [0x26BB]={d='on'},
 [0x26BC]={d='on'},
 [0x26BD]={d='on'},
 [0x26BE]={d='on'},
 [0x26BF]={d='on'},
 [0x26C0]={d='on'},
 [0x26C1]={d='on'},
 [0x26C2]={d='on'},
 [0x26C3]={d='on'},
 [0x26C4]={d='on'},
 [0x26C5]={d='on'},
 [0x26C6]={d='on'},
 [0x26C7]={d='on'},
 [0x26C8]={d='on'},
 [0x26C9]={d='on'},
 [0x26CA]={d='on'},
 [0x26CB]={d='on'},
 [0x26CC]={d='on'},
 [0x26CD]={d='on'},
 [0x26CE]={d='on'},
 [0x26CF]={d='on'},
 [0x26D0]={d='on'},
 [0x26D1]={d='on'},
 [0x26D2]={d='on'},
 [0x26D3]={d='on'},
 [0x26D4]={d='on'},
 [0x26D5]={d='on'},
 [0x26D6]={d='on'},
 [0x26D7]={d='on'},
 [0x26D8]={d='on'},
 [0x26D9]={d='on'},
 [0x26DA]={d='on'},
 [0x26DB]={d='on'},
 [0x26DC]={d='on'},
 [0x26DD]={d='on'},
 [0x26DE]={d='on'},
 [0x26DF]={d='on'},
 [0x26E0]={d='on'},
 [0x26E1]={d='on'},
 [0x26E2]={d='on'},
 [0x26E3]={d='on'},
 [0x26E4]={d='on'},
 [0x26E5]={d='on'},
 [0x26E6]={d='on'},
 [0x26E7]={d='on'},
 [0x26E8]={d='on'},
 [0x26E9]={d='on'},
 [0x26EA]={d='on'},
 [0x26EB]={d='on'},
 [0x26EC]={d='on'},
 [0x26ED]={d='on'},
 [0x26EE]={d='on'},
 [0x26EF]={d='on'},
 [0x26F0]={d='on'},
 [0x26F1]={d='on'},
 [0x26F2]={d='on'},
 [0x26F3]={d='on'},
 [0x26F4]={d='on'},
 [0x26F5]={d='on'},
 [0x26F6]={d='on'},
 [0x26F7]={d='on'},
 [0x26F8]={d='on'},
 [0x26F9]={d='on'},
 [0x26FA]={d='on'},
 [0x26FB]={d='on'},
 [0x26FC]={d='on'},
 [0x26FD]={d='on'},
 [0x26FE]={d='on'},
 [0x26FF]={d='on'},
 [0x2700]={d='on'},
 [0x2701]={d='on'},
 [0x2702]={d='on'},
 [0x2703]={d='on'},
 [0x2704]={d='on'},
 [0x2705]={d='on'},
 [0x2706]={d='on'},
 [0x2707]={d='on'},
 [0x2708]={d='on'},
 [0x2709]={d='on'},
 [0x270A]={d='on'},
 [0x270B]={d='on'},
 [0x270C]={d='on'},
 [0x270D]={d='on'},
 [0x270E]={d='on'},
 [0x270F]={d='on'},
 [0x2710]={d='on'},
 [0x2711]={d='on'},
 [0x2712]={d='on'},
 [0x2713]={d='on'},
 [0x2714]={d='on'},
 [0x2715]={d='on'},
 [0x2716]={d='on'},
 [0x2717]={d='on'},
 [0x2718]={d='on'},
 [0x2719]={d='on'},
 [0x271A]={d='on'},
 [0x271B]={d='on'},
 [0x271C]={d='on'},
 [0x271D]={d='on'},
 [0x271E]={d='on'},
 [0x271F]={d='on'},
 [0x2720]={d='on'},
 [0x2721]={d='on'},
 [0x2722]={d='on'},
 [0x2723]={d='on'},
 [0x2724]={d='on'},
 [0x2725]={d='on'},
 [0x2726]={d='on'},
 [0x2727]={d='on'},
 [0x2728]={d='on'},
 [0x2729]={d='on'},
 [0x272A]={d='on'},
 [0x272B]={d='on'},
 [0x272C]={d='on'},
 [0x272D]={d='on'},
 [0x272E]={d='on'},
 [0x272F]={d='on'},
 [0x2730]={d='on'},
 [0x2731]={d='on'},
 [0x2732]={d='on'},
 [0x2733]={d='on'},
 [0x2734]={d='on'},
 [0x2735]={d='on'},
 [0x2736]={d='on'},
 [0x2737]={d='on'},
 [0x2738]={d='on'},
 [0x2739]={d='on'},
 [0x273A]={d='on'},
 [0x273B]={d='on'},
 [0x273C]={d='on'},
 [0x273D]={d='on'},
 [0x273E]={d='on'},
 [0x273F]={d='on'},
 [0x2740]={d='on'},
 [0x2741]={d='on'},
 [0x2742]={d='on'},
 [0x2743]={d='on'},
 [0x2744]={d='on'},
 [0x2745]={d='on'},
 [0x2746]={d='on'},
 [0x2747]={d='on'},
 [0x2748]={d='on'},
 [0x2749]={d='on'},
 [0x274A]={d='on'},
 [0x274B]={d='on'},
 [0x274C]={d='on'},
 [0x274D]={d='on'},
 [0x274E]={d='on'},
 [0x274F]={d='on'},
 [0x2750]={d='on'},
 [0x2751]={d='on'},
 [0x2752]={d='on'},
 [0x2753]={d='on'},
 [0x2754]={d='on'},
 [0x2755]={d='on'},
 [0x2756]={d='on'},
 [0x2757]={d='on'},
 [0x2758]={d='on'},
 [0x2759]={d='on'},
 [0x275A]={d='on'},
 [0x275B]={d='on'},
 [0x275C]={d='on'},
 [0x275D]={d='on'},
 [0x275E]={d='on'},
 [0x275F]={d='on'},
 [0x2760]={d='on'},
 [0x2761]={d='on'},
 [0x2762]={d='on'},
 [0x2763]={d='on'},
 [0x2764]={d='on'},
 [0x2765]={d='on'},
 [0x2766]={d='on'},
 [0x2767]={d='on'},
 [0x2768]={d='on', m=0x2769},
 [0x2769]={d='on', m=0x2768},
 [0x276A]={d='on', m=0x276B},
 [0x276B]={d='on', m=0x276A},
 [0x276C]={d='on', m=0x276D},
 [0x276D]={d='on', m=0x276C},
 [0x276E]={d='on', m=0x276F},
 [0x276F]={d='on', m=0x276E},
 [0x2770]={d='on', m=0x2771},
 [0x2771]={d='on', m=0x2770},
 [0x2772]={d='on', m=0x2773},
 [0x2773]={d='on', m=0x2772},
 [0x2774]={d='on', m=0x2775},
 [0x2775]={d='on', m=0x2774},
 [0x2776]={d='on'},
 [0x2777]={d='on'},
 [0x2778]={d='on'},
 [0x2779]={d='on'},
 [0x277A]={d='on'},
 [0x277B]={d='on'},
 [0x277C]={d='on'},
 [0x277D]={d='on'},
 [0x277E]={d='on'},
 [0x277F]={d='on'},
 [0x2780]={d='on'},
 [0x2781]={d='on'},
 [0x2782]={d='on'},
 [0x2783]={d='on'},
 [0x2784]={d='on'},
 [0x2785]={d='on'},
 [0x2786]={d='on'},
 [0x2787]={d='on'},
 [0x2788]={d='on'},
 [0x2789]={d='on'},
 [0x278A]={d='on'},
 [0x278B]={d='on'},
 [0x278C]={d='on'},
 [0x278D]={d='on'},
 [0x278E]={d='on'},
 [0x278F]={d='on'},
 [0x2790]={d='on'},
 [0x2791]={d='on'},
 [0x2792]={d='on'},
 [0x2793]={d='on'},
 [0x2794]={d='on'},
 [0x2795]={d='on'},
 [0x2796]={d='on'},
 [0x2797]={d='on'},
 [0x2798]={d='on'},
 [0x2799]={d='on'},
 [0x279A]={d='on'},
 [0x279B]={d='on'},
 [0x279C]={d='on'},
 [0x279D]={d='on'},
 [0x279E]={d='on'},
 [0x279F]={d='on'},
 [0x27A0]={d='on'},
 [0x27A1]={d='on'},
 [0x27A2]={d='on'},
 [0x27A3]={d='on'},
 [0x27A4]={d='on'},
 [0x27A5]={d='on'},
 [0x27A6]={d='on'},
 [0x27A7]={d='on'},
 [0x27A8]={d='on'},
 [0x27A9]={d='on'},
 [0x27AA]={d='on'},
 [0x27AB]={d='on'},
 [0x27AC]={d='on'},
 [0x27AD]={d='on'},
 [0x27AE]={d='on'},
 [0x27AF]={d='on'},
 [0x27B0]={d='on'},
 [0x27B1]={d='on'},
 [0x27B2]={d='on'},
 [0x27B3]={d='on'},
 [0x27B4]={d='on'},
 [0x27B5]={d='on'},
 [0x27B6]={d='on'},
 [0x27B7]={d='on'},
 [0x27B8]={d='on'},
 [0x27B9]={d='on'},
 [0x27BA]={d='on'},
 [0x27BB]={d='on'},
 [0x27BC]={d='on'},
 [0x27BD]={d='on'},
 [0x27BE]={d='on'},
 [0x27BF]={d='on'},
 [0x27C0]={d='on'},
 [0x27C1]={d='on'},
 [0x27C2]={d='on'},
 [0x27C3]={d='on', m=0x27C4},
 [0x27C4]={d='on', m=0x27C3},
 [0x27C5]={d='on', m=0x27C6},
 [0x27C6]={d='on', m=0x27C5},
 [0x27C7]={d='on'},
 [0x27C8]={d='on', m=0x27C9},
 [0x27C9]={d='on', m=0x27C8},
 [0x27CA]={d='on'},
 [0x27CB]={d='on', m=0x27CD},
 [0x27CC]={d='on'},
 [0x27CD]={d='on', m=0x27CB},
 [0x27CE]={d='on'},
 [0x27CF]={d='on'},
 [0x27D0]={d='on'},
 [0x27D1]={d='on'},
 [0x27D2]={d='on'},
 [0x27D3]={d='on'},
 [0x27D4]={d='on'},
 [0x27D5]={d='on', m=0x27D6},
 [0x27D6]={d='on', m=0x27D5},
 [0x27D7]={d='on'},
 [0x27D8]={d='on'},
 [0x27D9]={d='on'},
 [0x27DA]={d='on'},
 [0x27DB]={d='on'},
 [0x27DC]={d='on'},
 [0x27DD]={d='on', m=0x27DE},
 [0x27DE]={d='on', m=0x27DD},
 [0x27DF]={d='on'},
 [0x27E0]={d='on'},
 [0x27E1]={d='on'},
 [0x27E2]={d='on', m=0x27E3},
 [0x27E3]={d='on', m=0x27E2},
 [0x27E4]={d='on', m=0x27E5},
 [0x27E5]={d='on', m=0x27E4},
 [0x27E6]={d='on', m=0x27E7},
 [0x27E7]={d='on', m=0x27E6},
 [0x27E8]={d='on', m=0x27E9},
 [0x27E9]={d='on', m=0x27E8},
 [0x27EA]={d='on', m=0x27EB},
 [0x27EB]={d='on', m=0x27EA},
 [0x27EC]={d='on', m=0x27ED},
 [0x27ED]={d='on', m=0x27EC},
 [0x27EE]={d='on', m=0x27EF},
 [0x27EF]={d='on', m=0x27EE},
 [0x27F0]={d='on'},
 [0x27F1]={d='on'},
 [0x27F2]={d='on'},
 [0x27F3]={d='on'},
 [0x27F4]={d='on'},
 [0x27F5]={d='on'},
 [0x27F6]={d='on'},
 [0x27F7]={d='on'},
 [0x27F8]={d='on'},
 [0x27F9]={d='on'},
 [0x27FA]={d='on'},
 [0x27FB]={d='on'},
 [0x27FC]={d='on'},
 [0x27FD]={d='on'},
 [0x27FE]={d='on'},
 [0x27FF]={d='on'},
 [0x2900]={d='on'},
 [0x2901]={d='on'},
 [0x2902]={d='on'},
 [0x2903]={d='on'},
 [0x2904]={d='on'},
 [0x2905]={d='on'},
 [0x2906]={d='on'},
 [0x2907]={d='on'},
 [0x2908]={d='on'},
 [0x2909]={d='on'},
 [0x290A]={d='on'},
 [0x290B]={d='on'},
 [0x290C]={d='on'},
 [0x290D]={d='on'},
 [0x290E]={d='on'},
 [0x290F]={d='on'},
 [0x2910]={d='on'},
 [0x2911]={d='on'},
 [0x2912]={d='on'},
 [0x2913]={d='on'},
 [0x2914]={d='on'},
 [0x2915]={d='on'},
 [0x2916]={d='on'},
 [0x2917]={d='on'},
 [0x2918]={d='on'},
 [0x2919]={d='on'},
 [0x291A]={d='on'},
 [0x291B]={d='on'},
 [0x291C]={d='on'},
 [0x291D]={d='on'},
 [0x291E]={d='on'},
 [0x291F]={d='on'},
 [0x2920]={d='on'},
 [0x2921]={d='on'},
 [0x2922]={d='on'},
 [0x2923]={d='on'},
 [0x2924]={d='on'},
 [0x2925]={d='on'},
 [0x2926]={d='on'},
 [0x2927]={d='on'},
 [0x2928]={d='on'},
 [0x2929]={d='on'},
 [0x292A]={d='on'},
 [0x292B]={d='on'},
 [0x292C]={d='on'},
 [0x292D]={d='on'},
 [0x292E]={d='on'},
 [0x292F]={d='on'},
 [0x2930]={d='on'},
 [0x2931]={d='on'},
 [0x2932]={d='on'},
 [0x2933]={d='on'},
 [0x2934]={d='on'},
 [0x2935]={d='on'},
 [0x2936]={d='on'},
 [0x2937]={d='on'},
 [0x2938]={d='on'},
 [0x2939]={d='on'},
 [0x293A]={d='on'},
 [0x293B]={d='on'},
 [0x293C]={d='on'},
 [0x293D]={d='on'},
 [0x293E]={d='on'},
 [0x293F]={d='on'},
 [0x2940]={d='on'},
 [0x2941]={d='on'},
 [0x2942]={d='on'},
 [0x2943]={d='on'},
 [0x2944]={d='on'},
 [0x2945]={d='on'},
 [0x2946]={d='on'},
 [0x2947]={d='on'},
 [0x2948]={d='on'},
 [0x2949]={d='on'},
 [0x294A]={d='on'},
 [0x294B]={d='on'},
 [0x294C]={d='on'},
 [0x294D]={d='on'},
 [0x294E]={d='on'},
 [0x294F]={d='on'},
 [0x2950]={d='on'},
 [0x2951]={d='on'},
 [0x2952]={d='on'},
 [0x2953]={d='on'},
 [0x2954]={d='on'},
 [0x2955]={d='on'},
 [0x2956]={d='on'},
 [0x2957]={d='on'},
 [0x2958]={d='on'},
 [0x2959]={d='on'},
 [0x295A]={d='on'},
 [0x295B]={d='on'},
 [0x295C]={d='on'},
 [0x295D]={d='on'},
 [0x295E]={d='on'},
 [0x295F]={d='on'},
 [0x2960]={d='on'},
 [0x2961]={d='on'},
 [0x2962]={d='on'},
 [0x2963]={d='on'},
 [0x2964]={d='on'},
 [0x2965]={d='on'},
 [0x2966]={d='on'},
 [0x2967]={d='on'},
 [0x2968]={d='on'},
 [0x2969]={d='on'},
 [0x296A]={d='on'},
 [0x296B]={d='on'},
 [0x296C]={d='on'},
 [0x296D]={d='on'},
 [0x296E]={d='on'},
 [0x296F]={d='on'},
 [0x2970]={d='on'},
 [0x2971]={d='on'},
 [0x2972]={d='on'},
 [0x2973]={d='on'},
 [0x2974]={d='on'},
 [0x2975]={d='on'},
 [0x2976]={d='on'},
 [0x2977]={d='on'},
 [0x2978]={d='on'},
 [0x2979]={d='on'},
 [0x297A]={d='on'},
 [0x297B]={d='on'},
 [0x297C]={d='on'},
 [0x297D]={d='on'},
 [0x297E]={d='on'},
 [0x297F]={d='on'},
 [0x2980]={d='on'},
 [0x2981]={d='on'},
 [0x2982]={d='on'},
 [0x2983]={d='on', m=0x2984},
 [0x2984]={d='on', m=0x2983},
 [0x2985]={d='on', m=0x2986},
 [0x2986]={d='on', m=0x2985},
 [0x2987]={d='on', m=0x2988},
 [0x2988]={d='on', m=0x2987},
 [0x2989]={d='on', m=0x298A},
 [0x298A]={d='on', m=0x2989},
 [0x298B]={d='on', m=0x298C},
 [0x298C]={d='on', m=0x298B},
 [0x298D]={d='on', m=0x2990},
 [0x298E]={d='on', m=0x298F},
 [0x298F]={d='on', m=0x298E},
 [0x2990]={d='on', m=0x298D},
 [0x2991]={d='on', m=0x2992},
 [0x2992]={d='on', m=0x2991},
 [0x2993]={d='on', m=0x2994},
 [0x2994]={d='on', m=0x2993},
 [0x2995]={d='on', m=0x2996},
 [0x2996]={d='on', m=0x2995},
 [0x2997]={d='on', m=0x2998},
 [0x2998]={d='on', m=0x2997},
 [0x2999]={d='on'},
 [0x299A]={d='on'},
 [0x299B]={d='on'},
 [0x299C]={d='on'},
 [0x299D]={d='on'},
 [0x299E]={d='on'},
 [0x299F]={d='on'},
 [0x29A0]={d='on'},
 [0x29A1]={d='on'},
 [0x29A2]={d='on'},
 [0x29A3]={d='on'},
 [0x29A4]={d='on'},
 [0x29A5]={d='on'},
 [0x29A6]={d='on'},
 [0x29A7]={d='on'},
 [0x29A8]={d='on'},
 [0x29A9]={d='on'},
 [0x29AA]={d='on'},
 [0x29AB]={d='on'},
 [0x29AC]={d='on'},
 [0x29AD]={d='on'},
 [0x29AE]={d='on'},
 [0x29AF]={d='on'},
 [0x29B0]={d='on'},
 [0x29B1]={d='on'},
 [0x29B2]={d='on'},
 [0x29B3]={d='on'},
 [0x29B4]={d='on'},
 [0x29B5]={d='on'},
 [0x29B6]={d='on'},
 [0x29B7]={d='on'},
 [0x29B8]={d='on', m=0x2298},
 [0x29B9]={d='on'},
 [0x29BA]={d='on'},
 [0x29BB]={d='on'},
 [0x29BC]={d='on'},
 [0x29BD]={d='on'},
 [0x29BE]={d='on'},
 [0x29BF]={d='on'},
 [0x29C0]={d='on', m=0x29C1},
 [0x29C1]={d='on', m=0x29C0},
 [0x29C2]={d='on'},
 [0x29C3]={d='on'},
 [0x29C4]={d='on', m=0x29C5},
 [0x29C5]={d='on', m=0x29C4},
 [0x29C6]={d='on'},
 [0x29C7]={d='on'},
 [0x29C8]={d='on'},
 [0x29C9]={d='on'},
 [0x29CA]={d='on'},
 [0x29CB]={d='on'},
 [0x29CC]={d='on'},
 [0x29CD]={d='on'},
 [0x29CE]={d='on'},
 [0x29CF]={d='on', m=0x29D0},
 [0x29D0]={d='on', m=0x29CF},
 [0x29D1]={d='on', m=0x29D2},
 [0x29D2]={d='on', m=0x29D1},
 [0x29D3]={d='on'},
 [0x29D4]={d='on', m=0x29D5},
 [0x29D5]={d='on', m=0x29D4},
 [0x29D6]={d='on'},
 [0x29D7]={d='on'},
 [0x29D8]={d='on', m=0x29D9},
 [0x29D9]={d='on', m=0x29D8},
 [0x29DA]={d='on', m=0x29DB},
 [0x29DB]={d='on', m=0x29DA},
 [0x29DC]={d='on'},
 [0x29DD]={d='on'},
 [0x29DE]={d='on'},
 [0x29DF]={d='on'},
 [0x29E0]={d='on'},
 [0x29E1]={d='on'},
 [0x29E2]={d='on'},
 [0x29E3]={d='on'},
 [0x29E4]={d='on'},
 [0x29E5]={d='on'},
 [0x29E6]={d='on'},
 [0x29E7]={d='on'},
 [0x29E8]={d='on'},
 [0x29E9]={d='on'},
 [0x29EA]={d='on'},
 [0x29EB]={d='on'},
 [0x29EC]={d='on'},
 [0x29ED]={d='on'},
 [0x29EE]={d='on'},
 [0x29EF]={d='on'},
 [0x29F0]={d='on'},
 [0x29F1]={d='on'},
 [0x29F2]={d='on'},
 [0x29F3]={d='on'},
 [0x29F4]={d='on'},
 [0x29F5]={d='on', m=0x2215},
 [0x29F6]={d='on'},
 [0x29F7]={d='on'},
 [0x29F8]={d='on', m=0x29F9},
 [0x29F9]={d='on', m=0x29F8},
 [0x29FA]={d='on'},
 [0x29FB]={d='on'},
 [0x29FC]={d='on', m=0x29FD},
 [0x29FD]={d='on', m=0x29FC},
 [0x29FE]={d='on'},
 [0x29FF]={d='on'},
 [0x2A00]={d='on'},
 [0x2A01]={d='on'},
 [0x2A02]={d='on'},
 [0x2A03]={d='on'},
 [0x2A04]={d='on'},
 [0x2A05]={d='on'},
 [0x2A06]={d='on'},
 [0x2A07]={d='on'},
 [0x2A08]={d='on'},
 [0x2A09]={d='on'},
 [0x2A0A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A0B]={d='on'},
 [0x2A0C]={d='on'},
 [0x2A0D]={d='on'},
 [0x2A0E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A0F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A10]={d='on'},
 [0x2A11]={d='on'},
 [0x2A12]={d='on'},
 [0x2A13]={d='on'},
 [0x2A14]={d='on'},
 [0x2A15]={d='on'},
 [0x2A16]={d='on'},
 [0x2A17]={d='on'},
 [0x2A18]={d='on'},
 [0x2A19]={d='on'},
 [0x2A1A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A1B]={d='on'},
 [0x2A1C]={d='on'},
 [0x2A1D]={d='on'},
 [0x2A1E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A1F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A20]={d='on'},
 [0x2A21]={d='on'},
 [0x2A22]={d='on'},
 [0x2A23]={d='on'},
 [0x2A24]={d='on'},
 [0x2A25]={d='on'},
 [0x2A26]={d='on'},
 [0x2A27]={d='on'},
 [0x2A28]={d='on'},
 [0x2A29]={d='on'},
 [0x2A2A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A2B]={d='on', m=0x2A2C},
 [0x2A2C]={d='on', m=0x2A2B},
 [0x2A2D]={d='on', m=0x2A2E},
 [0x2A2E]={d='on', m=0x2A2D},
 [0x2A2F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A30]={d='on'},
 [0x2A31]={d='on'},
 [0x2A32]={d='on'},
 [0x2A33]={d='on'},
 [0x2A34]={d='on', m=0x2A35},
 [0x2A35]={d='on', m=0x2A34},
 [0x2A36]={d='on'},
 [0x2A37]={d='on'},
 [0x2A38]={d='on'},
 [0x2A39]={d='on'},
 [0x2A3A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A3B]={d='on'},
 [0x2A3C]={d='on', m=0x2A3D},
 [0x2A3D]={d='on', m=0x2A3C},
 [0x2A3E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A3F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A40]={d='on'},
 [0x2A41]={d='on'},
 [0x2A42]={d='on'},
 [0x2A43]={d='on'},
 [0x2A44]={d='on'},
 [0x2A45]={d='on'},
 [0x2A46]={d='on'},
 [0x2A47]={d='on'},
 [0x2A48]={d='on'},
 [0x2A49]={d='on'},
 [0x2A4A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A4B]={d='on'},
 [0x2A4C]={d='on'},
 [0x2A4D]={d='on'},
 [0x2A4E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A4F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A50]={d='on'},
 [0x2A51]={d='on'},
 [0x2A52]={d='on'},
 [0x2A53]={d='on'},
 [0x2A54]={d='on'},
 [0x2A55]={d='on'},
 [0x2A56]={d='on'},
 [0x2A57]={d='on'},
 [0x2A58]={d='on'},
 [0x2A59]={d='on'},
 [0x2A5A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A5B]={d='on'},
 [0x2A5C]={d='on'},
 [0x2A5D]={d='on'},
 [0x2A5E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A5F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A60]={d='on'},
 [0x2A61]={d='on'},
 [0x2A62]={d='on'},
 [0x2A63]={d='on'},
 [0x2A64]={d='on', m=0x2A65},
 [0x2A65]={d='on', m=0x2A64},
 [0x2A66]={d='on'},
 [0x2A67]={d='on'},
 [0x2A68]={d='on'},
 [0x2A69]={d='on'},
 [0x2A6A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A6B]={d='on'},
 [0x2A6C]={d='on'},
 [0x2A6D]={d='on'},
 [0x2A6E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A6F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A70]={d='on'},
 [0x2A71]={d='on'},
 [0x2A72]={d='on'},
 [0x2A73]={d='on'},
 [0x2A74]={d='on'},
 [0x2A75]={d='on'},
 [0x2A76]={d='on'},
 [0x2A77]={d='on'},
 [0x2A78]={d='on'},
 [0x2A79]={d='on', m=0x2A7A},
 [0x2A7A]={d='on', m=0x2A79},
 [0x2A7B]={d='on'},
 [0x2A7C]={d='on'},
 [0x2A7D]={d='on', m=0x2A7E},
 [0x2A7E]={d='on', m=0x2A7D},
 [0x2A7F]={d='on', m=0x2A80},
 [0x2A80]={d='on', m=0x2A7F},
 [0x2A81]={d='on', m=0x2A82},
 [0x2A82]={d='on', m=0x2A81},
 [0x2A83]={d='on', m=0x2A84},
 [0x2A84]={d='on', m=0x2A83},
 [0x2A85]={d='on'},
 [0x2A86]={d='on'},
 [0x2A87]={d='on'},
 [0x2A88]={d='on'},
 [0x2A89]={d='on'},
 [0x2A8A]={d='on'},
 [0x2A8B]={d='on', m=0x2A8C},
 [0x2A8C]={d='on', m=0x2A8B},
 [0x2A8D]={d='on'},
 [0x2A8E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A8F]={d='on'},
 [0x2A90]={d='on'},
 [0x2A91]={d='on', m=0x2A92},
 [0x2A92]={d='on', m=0x2A91},
 [0x2A93]={d='on', m=0x2A94},
 [0x2A94]={d='on', m=0x2A93},
 [0x2A95]={d='on', m=0x2A96},
 [0x2A96]={d='on', m=0x2A95},
 [0x2A97]={d='on', m=0x2A98},
 [0x2A98]={d='on', m=0x2A97},
 [0x2A99]={d='on', m=0x2A9A},
 [0x2A9A]={d='on', m=0x2A99},
 [0x2A9B]={d='on', m=0x2A9C},
 [0x2A9C]={d='on', m=0x2A9B},
 [0x2A9D]={d='on'},
 [0x2A9E]={d='on'},
 [0x2A9F]={d='on'},
 [0x2AA0]={d='on'},
 [0x2AA1]={d='on', m=0x2AA2},
 [0x2AA2]={d='on', m=0x2AA1},
 [0x2AA3]={d='on'},
 [0x2AA4]={d='on'},
 [0x2AA5]={d='on'},
 [0x2AA6]={d='on', m=0x2AA7},
 [0x2AA7]={d='on', m=0x2AA6},
 [0x2AA8]={d='on', m=0x2AA9},
 [0x2AA9]={d='on', m=0x2AA8},
 [0x2AAA]={d='on', m=0x2AAB},
 [0x2AAB]={d='on', m=0x2AAA},
 [0x2AAC]={d='on', m=0x2AAD},
 [0x2AAD]={d='on', m=0x2AAC},
 [0x2AAE]={d='on'},
 [0x2AAF]={d='on', m=0x2AB0},
 [0x2AB0]={d='on', m=0x2AAF},
 [0x2AB1]={d='on'},
 [0x2AB2]={d='on'},
 [0x2AB3]={d='on', m=0x2AB4},
 [0x2AB4]={d='on', m=0x2AB3},
 [0x2AB5]={d='on'},
 [0x2AB6]={d='on'},
 [0x2AB7]={d='on'},
 [0x2AB8]={d='on'},
 [0x2AB9]={d='on'},
 [0x2ABA]={d='on'},
 [0x2ABB]={d='on', m=0x2ABC},
 [0x2ABC]={d='on', m=0x2ABB},
 [0x2ABD]={d='on', m=0x2ABE},
 [0x2ABE]={d='on', m=0x2ABD},
 [0x2ABF]={d='on', m=0x2AC0},
 [0x2AC0]={d='on', m=0x2ABF},
 [0x2AC1]={d='on', m=0x2AC2},
 [0x2AC2]={d='on', m=0x2AC1},
 [0x2AC3]={d='on', m=0x2AC4},
 [0x2AC4]={d='on', m=0x2AC3},
 [0x2AC5]={d='on', m=0x2AC6},
 [0x2AC6]={d='on', m=0x2AC5},
 [0x2AC7]={d='on'},
 [0x2AC8]={d='on'},
 [0x2AC9]={d='on'},
 [0x2ACA]={d='on'},
 [0x2ACB]={d='on'},
 [0x2ACC]={d='on'},
 [0x2ACD]={d='on', m=0x2ACE},
 [0x2ACE]={d='on', m=0x2ACD},
 [0x2ACF]={d='on', m=0x2AD0},
 [0x2AD0]={d='on', m=0x2ACF},
 [0x2AD1]={d='on', m=0x2AD2},
 [0x2AD2]={d='on', m=0x2AD1},
 [0x2AD3]={d='on', m=0x2AD4},
 [0x2AD4]={d='on', m=0x2AD3},
 [0x2AD5]={d='on', m=0x2AD6},
 [0x2AD6]={d='on', m=0x2AD5},
 [0x2AD7]={d='on'},
 [0x2AD8]={d='on'},
 [0x2AD9]={d='on'},
 [0x2ADA]={d='on'},
 [0x2ADB]={d='on'},
 [0x2ADC]={d='on'},
 [0x2ADD]={d='on'},
 [0x2ADE]={d='on', m=0x22A6},
 [0x2ADF]={d='on'},
 [0x2AE0]={d='on'},
 [0x2AE1]={d='on'},
 [0x2AE2]={d='on'},
 [0x2AE3]={d='on', m=0x22A9},
 [0x2AE4]={d='on', m=0x22A8},
 [0x2AE5]={d='on', m=0x22AB},
 [0x2AE6]={d='on'},
 [0x2AE7]={d='on'},
 [0x2AE8]={d='on'},
 [0x2AE9]={d='on'},
 [0x2AEA]={d='on'},
 [0x2AEB]={d='on'},
 [0x2AEC]={d='on', m=0x2AED},
 [0x2AED]={d='on', m=0x2AEC},
 [0x2AEE]={d='on'},
 [0x2AEF]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF0]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF1]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF2]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF3]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF4]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF5]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF6]={d='on'},
 [0x2AF7]={d='on', m=0x2AF8},
 [0x2AF8]={d='on', m=0x2AF7},
 [0x2AF9]={d='on', m=0x2AFA},
 [0x2AFA]={d='on', m=0x2AF9},
 [0x2AFB]={d='on'},
 [0x2AFC]={d='on'},
 [0x2AFD]={d='on'},
 [0x2AFE]={d='on'},
 [0x2AFF]={d='on'},
 [0x2B00]={d='on'},
 [0x2B01]={d='on'},
 [0x2B02]={d='on'},
 [0x2B03]={d='on'},
 [0x2B04]={d='on'},
 [0x2B05]={d='on'},
 [0x2B06]={d='on'},
 [0x2B07]={d='on'},
 [0x2B08]={d='on'},
 [0x2B09]={d='on'},
 [0x2B0A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B0B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B0C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B0D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B0E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B0F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B10]={d='on'},
 [0x2B11]={d='on'},
 [0x2B12]={d='on'},
 [0x2B13]={d='on'},
 [0x2B14]={d='on'},
 [0x2B15]={d='on'},
 [0x2B16]={d='on'},
 [0x2B17]={d='on'},
 [0x2B18]={d='on'},
 [0x2B19]={d='on'},
 [0x2B1A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B1B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B1C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B1D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B1E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B1F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B20]={d='on'},
 [0x2B21]={d='on'},
 [0x2B22]={d='on'},
 [0x2B23]={d='on'},
 [0x2B24]={d='on'},
 [0x2B25]={d='on'},
 [0x2B26]={d='on'},
 [0x2B27]={d='on'},
 [0x2B28]={d='on'},
 [0x2B29]={d='on'},
 [0x2B2A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B2B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B2C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B2D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B2E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B2F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B30]={d='on'},
 [0x2B31]={d='on'},
 [0x2B32]={d='on'},
 [0x2B33]={d='on'},
 [0x2B34]={d='on'},
 [0x2B35]={d='on'},
 [0x2B36]={d='on'},
 [0x2B37]={d='on'},
 [0x2B38]={d='on'},
 [0x2B39]={d='on'},
 [0x2B3A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B3B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B3C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B3D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B3E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B3F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B40]={d='on'},
 [0x2B41]={d='on'},
 [0x2B42]={d='on'},
 [0x2B43]={d='on'},
 [0x2B44]={d='on'},
 [0x2B45]={d='on'},
 [0x2B46]={d='on'},
 [0x2B47]={d='on'},
 [0x2B48]={d='on'},
 [0x2B49]={d='on'},
 [0x2B4A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B4B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B4C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B4D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B4E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B4F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B50]={d='on'},
 [0x2B51]={d='on'},
 [0x2B52]={d='on'},
 [0x2B53]={d='on'},
 [0x2B54]={d='on'},
 [0x2B55]={d='on'},
 [0x2B56]={d='on'},
 [0x2B57]={d='on'},
 [0x2B58]={d='on'},
 [0x2B59]={d='on'},
 [0x2B5A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B5B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B5C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B5D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B5E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B5F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B60]={d='on'},
 [0x2B61]={d='on'},
 [0x2B62]={d='on'},
 [0x2B63]={d='on'},
 [0x2B64]={d='on'},
 [0x2B65]={d='on'},
 [0x2B66]={d='on'},
 [0x2B67]={d='on'},
 [0x2B68]={d='on'},
 [0x2B69]={d='on'},
 [0x2B6A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B6B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B6C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B6D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B6E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B6F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B70]={d='on'},
 [0x2B71]={d='on'},
 [0x2B72]={d='on'},
 [0x2B73]={d='on'},
 [0x2B76]={d='on'},
 [0x2B77]={d='on'},
 [0x2B78]={d='on'},
 [0x2B79]={d='on'},
 [0x2B7A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B7B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B7C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B7D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B7E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B7F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B80]={d='on'},
 [0x2B81]={d='on'},
 [0x2B82]={d='on'},
 [0x2B83]={d='on'},
 [0x2B84]={d='on'},
 [0x2B85]={d='on'},
 [0x2B86]={d='on'},
 [0x2B87]={d='on'},
 [0x2B88]={d='on'},
 [0x2B89]={d='on'},
 [0x2B8A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B8B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B8C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B8D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B8E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B8F]={d='on'},
 [0x2B90]={d='on'},
 [0x2B91]={d='on'},
 [0x2B92]={d='on'},
 [0x2B93]={d='on'},
 [0x2B94]={d='on'},
 [0x2B95]={d='on'},
 [0x2B98]={d='on'},
 [0x2B99]={d='on'},
 [0x2B9A]={d='on'},
 [0x2B9B]={d='on'},
 [0x2B9C]={d='on'},
 [0x2B9D]={d='on'},
 [0x2B9E]={d='on'},
 [0x2B9F]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA0]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA1]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA2]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA3]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA4]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA5]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA6]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA7]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA8]={d='on'},
 [0x2BA9]={d='on'},
 [0x2BAA]={d='on'},
 [0x2BAB]={d='on'},
 [0x2BAC]={d='on'},
 [0x2BAD]={d='on'},
 [0x2BAE]={d='on'},
 [0x2BAF]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB0]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB1]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB2]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB3]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB4]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB5]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB6]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB7]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB8]={d='on'},
 [0x2BB9]={d='on'},
 [0x2BBD]={d='on'},
 [0x2BBE]={d='on'},
 [0x2BBF]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC0]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC1]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC2]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC3]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC4]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC5]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC6]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC7]={d='on'},
 [0x2BC8]={d='on'},
 [0x2BCA]={d='on'},
 [0x2BCB]={d='on'},
 [0x2BCC]={d='on'},
 [0x2BCD]={d='on'},
 [0x2BCE]={d='on'},
 [0x2BCF]={d='on'},
 [0x2BD0]={d='on'},
 [0x2BD1]={d='on'},
 [0x2BEC]={d='on'},
 [0x2BED]={d='on'},
 [0x2BEE]={d='on'},
 [0x2BEF]={d='on'},
 [0x2CE5]={d='on'},
 [0x2CE6]={d='on'},
 [0x2CE7]={d='on'},
 [0x2CE8]={d='on'},
 [0x2CE9]={d='on'},
 [0x2CEA]={d='on'},
 [0x2CEF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2CF0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2CF1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2CF9]={d='on'},
 [0x2CFA]={d='on'},
 [0x2CFB]={d='on'},
 [0x2CFC]={d='on'},
 [0x2CFD]={d='on'},
 [0x2CFE]={d='on'},
 [0x2CFF]={d='on'},
 [0x2D7F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DE9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DEA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DEB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DEC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DED]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DEE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DEF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DF9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DFA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DFB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DFC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DFD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DFE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2DFF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x2E00]={d='on'},
 [0x2E01]={d='on'},
 [0x2E02]={d='on', m=0x2E03},
 [0x2E03]={d='on', m=0x2E02},
 [0x2E04]={d='on', m=0x2E05},
 [0x2E05]={d='on', m=0x2E04},
 [0x2E06]={d='on'},
 [0x2E07]={d='on'},
 [0x2E08]={d='on'},
 [0x2E09]={d='on', m=0x2E0A},
 [0x2E0A]={d='on', m=0x2E09},
 [0x2E0B]={d='on'},
 [0x2E0C]={d='on', m=0x2E0D},
 [0x2E0D]={d='on', m=0x2E0C},
 [0x2E0E]={d='on'},
 [0x2E0F]={d='on'},
 [0x2E10]={d='on'},
 [0x2E11]={d='on'},
 [0x2E12]={d='on'},
 [0x2E13]={d='on'},
 [0x2E14]={d='on'},
 [0x2E15]={d='on'},
 [0x2E16]={d='on'},
 [0x2E17]={d='on'},
 [0x2E18]={d='on'},
 [0x2E19]={d='on'},
 [0x2E1A]={d='on'},
 [0x2E1B]={d='on'},
 [0x2E1C]={d='on', m=0x2E1D},
 [0x2E1D]={d='on', m=0x2E1C},
 [0x2E1E]={d='on'},
 [0x2E1F]={d='on'},
 [0x2E20]={d='on', m=0x2E21},
 [0x2E21]={d='on', m=0x2E20},
 [0x2E22]={d='on', m=0x2E23},
 [0x2E23]={d='on', m=0x2E22},
 [0x2E24]={d='on', m=0x2E25},
 [0x2E25]={d='on', m=0x2E24},
 [0x2E26]={d='on', m=0x2E27},
 [0x2E27]={d='on', m=0x2E26},
 [0x2E28]={d='on', m=0x2E29},
 [0x2E29]={d='on', m=0x2E28},
 [0x2E2A]={d='on'},
 [0x2E2B]={d='on'},
 [0x2E2C]={d='on'},
 [0x2E2D]={d='on'},
 [0x2E2E]={d='on'},
 [0x2E2F]={d='on'},
 [0x2E30]={d='on'},
 [0x2E31]={d='on'},
 [0x2E32]={d='on'},
 [0x2E33]={d='on'},
 [0x2E34]={d='on'},
 [0x2E35]={d='on'},
 [0x2E36]={d='on'},
 [0x2E37]={d='on'},
 [0x2E38]={d='on'},
 [0x2E39]={d='on'},
 [0x2E3A]={d='on'},
 [0x2E3B]={d='on'},
 [0x2E3C]={d='on'},
 [0x2E3D]={d='on'},
 [0x2E3E]={d='on'},
 [0x2E3F]={d='on'},
 [0x2E40]={d='on'},
 [0x2E41]={d='on'},
 [0x2E42]={d='on'},
 [0x2E43]={d='on'},
 [0x2E44]={d='on'},
 [0x2E80]={d='on'},
 [0x2E81]={d='on'},
 [0x2E82]={d='on'},
 [0x2E83]={d='on'},
 [0x2E84]={d='on'},
 [0x2E85]={d='on'},
 [0x2E86]={d='on'},
 [0x2E87]={d='on'},
 [0x2E88]={d='on'},
 [0x2E89]={d='on'},
 [0x2E8A]={d='on'},
 [0x2E8B]={d='on'},
 [0x2E8C]={d='on'},
 [0x2E8D]={d='on'},
 [0x2E8E]={d='on'},
 [0x2E8F]={d='on'},
 [0x2E90]={d='on'},
 [0x2E91]={d='on'},
 [0x2E92]={d='on'},
 [0x2E93]={d='on'},
 [0x2E94]={d='on'},
 [0x2E95]={d='on'},
 [0x2E96]={d='on'},
 [0x2E97]={d='on'},
 [0x2E98]={d='on'},
 [0x2E99]={d='on'},
 [0x2E9B]={d='on'},
 [0x2E9C]={d='on'},
 [0x2E9D]={d='on'},
 [0x2E9E]={d='on'},
 [0x2E9F]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA0]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA1]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA2]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA3]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA4]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA5]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA6]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA7]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA8]={d='on'},
 [0x2EA9]={d='on'},
 [0x2EAA]={d='on'},
 [0x2EAB]={d='on'},
 [0x2EAC]={d='on'},
 [0x2EAD]={d='on'},
 [0x2EAE]={d='on'},
 [0x2EAF]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB0]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB1]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB2]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB3]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB4]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB5]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB6]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB7]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB8]={d='on'},
 [0x2EB9]={d='on'},
 [0x2EBA]={d='on'},
 [0x2EBB]={d='on'},
 [0x2EBC]={d='on'},
 [0x2EBD]={d='on'},
 [0x2EBE]={d='on'},
 [0x2EBF]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC0]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC1]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC2]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC3]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC4]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC5]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC6]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC7]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC8]={d='on'},
 [0x2EC9]={d='on'},
 [0x2ECA]={d='on'},
 [0x2ECB]={d='on'},
 [0x2ECC]={d='on'},
 [0x2ECD]={d='on'},
 [0x2ECE]={d='on'},
 [0x2ECF]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED0]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED1]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED2]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED3]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED4]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED5]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED6]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED7]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED8]={d='on'},
 [0x2ED9]={d='on'},
 [0x2EDA]={d='on'},
 [0x2EDB]={d='on'},
 [0x2EDC]={d='on'},
 [0x2EDD]={d='on'},
 [0x2EDE]={d='on'},
 [0x2EDF]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE0]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE1]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE2]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE3]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE4]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE5]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE6]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE7]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE8]={d='on'},
 [0x2EE9]={d='on'},
 [0x2EEA]={d='on'},
 [0x2EEB]={d='on'},
 [0x2EEC]={d='on'},
 [0x2EED]={d='on'},
 [0x2EEE]={d='on'},
 [0x2EEF]={d='on'},
 [0x2EF0]={d='on'},
 [0x2EF1]={d='on'},
 [0x2EF2]={d='on'},
 [0x2EF3]={d='on'},
 [0x2F00]={d='on'},
 [0x2F01]={d='on'},
 [0x2F02]={d='on'},
 [0x2F03]={d='on'},
 [0x2F04]={d='on'},
 [0x2F05]={d='on'},
 [0x2F06]={d='on'},
 [0x2F07]={d='on'},
 [0x2F08]={d='on'},
 [0x2F09]={d='on'},
 [0x2F0A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F0B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F0C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F0D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F0E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F0F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F10]={d='on'},
 [0x2F11]={d='on'},
 [0x2F12]={d='on'},
 [0x2F13]={d='on'},
 [0x2F14]={d='on'},
 [0x2F15]={d='on'},
 [0x2F16]={d='on'},
 [0x2F17]={d='on'},
 [0x2F18]={d='on'},
 [0x2F19]={d='on'},
 [0x2F1A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F1B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F1C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F1D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F1E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F1F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F20]={d='on'},
 [0x2F21]={d='on'},
 [0x2F22]={d='on'},
 [0x2F23]={d='on'},
 [0x2F24]={d='on'},
 [0x2F25]={d='on'},
 [0x2F26]={d='on'},
 [0x2F27]={d='on'},
 [0x2F28]={d='on'},
 [0x2F29]={d='on'},
 [0x2F2A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F2B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F2C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F2D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F2E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F2F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F30]={d='on'},
 [0x2F31]={d='on'},
 [0x2F32]={d='on'},
 [0x2F33]={d='on'},
 [0x2F34]={d='on'},
 [0x2F35]={d='on'},
 [0x2F36]={d='on'},
 [0x2F37]={d='on'},
 [0x2F38]={d='on'},
 [0x2F39]={d='on'},
 [0x2F3A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F3B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F3C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F3D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F3E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F3F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F40]={d='on'},
 [0x2F41]={d='on'},
 [0x2F42]={d='on'},
 [0x2F43]={d='on'},
 [0x2F44]={d='on'},
 [0x2F45]={d='on'},
 [0x2F46]={d='on'},
 [0x2F47]={d='on'},
 [0x2F48]={d='on'},
 [0x2F49]={d='on'},
 [0x2F4A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F4B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F4C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F4D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F4E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F4F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F50]={d='on'},
 [0x2F51]={d='on'},
 [0x2F52]={d='on'},
 [0x2F53]={d='on'},
 [0x2F54]={d='on'},
 [0x2F55]={d='on'},
 [0x2F56]={d='on'},
 [0x2F57]={d='on'},
 [0x2F58]={d='on'},
 [0x2F59]={d='on'},
 [0x2F5A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F5B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F5C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F5D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F5E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F5F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F60]={d='on'},
 [0x2F61]={d='on'},
 [0x2F62]={d='on'},
 [0x2F63]={d='on'},
 [0x2F64]={d='on'},
 [0x2F65]={d='on'},
 [0x2F66]={d='on'},
 [0x2F67]={d='on'},
 [0x2F68]={d='on'},
 [0x2F69]={d='on'},
 [0x2F6A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F6B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F6C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F6D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F6E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F6F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F70]={d='on'},
 [0x2F71]={d='on'},
 [0x2F72]={d='on'},
 [0x2F73]={d='on'},
 [0x2F74]={d='on'},
 [0x2F75]={d='on'},
 [0x2F76]={d='on'},
 [0x2F77]={d='on'},
 [0x2F78]={d='on'},
 [0x2F79]={d='on'},
 [0x2F7A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F7B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F7C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F7D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F7E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F7F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F80]={d='on'},
 [0x2F81]={d='on'},
 [0x2F82]={d='on'},
 [0x2F83]={d='on'},
 [0x2F84]={d='on'},
 [0x2F85]={d='on'},
 [0x2F86]={d='on'},
 [0x2F87]={d='on'},
 [0x2F88]={d='on'},
 [0x2F89]={d='on'},
 [0x2F8A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F8B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F8C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F8D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F8E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F8F]={d='on'},
 [0x2F90]={d='on'},
 [0x2F91]={d='on'},
 [0x2F92]={d='on'},
 [0x2F93]={d='on'},
 [0x2F94]={d='on'},
 [0x2F95]={d='on'},
 [0x2F96]={d='on'},
 [0x2F97]={d='on'},
 [0x2F98]={d='on'},
 [0x2F99]={d='on'},
 [0x2F9A]={d='on'},
 [0x2F9B]={d='on'},
 [0x2F9C]={d='on'},
 [0x2F9D]={d='on'},
 [0x2F9E]={d='on'},
 [0x2F9F]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA0]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA1]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA2]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA3]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA4]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA5]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA6]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA7]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA8]={d='on'},
 [0x2FA9]={d='on'},
 [0x2FAA]={d='on'},
 [0x2FAB]={d='on'},
 [0x2FAC]={d='on'},
 [0x2FAD]={d='on'},
 [0x2FAE]={d='on'},
 [0x2FAF]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB0]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB1]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB2]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB3]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB4]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB5]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB6]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB7]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB8]={d='on'},
 [0x2FB9]={d='on'},
 [0x2FBA]={d='on'},
 [0x2FBB]={d='on'},
 [0x2FBC]={d='on'},
 [0x2FBD]={d='on'},
 [0x2FBE]={d='on'},
 [0x2FBF]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC0]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC1]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC2]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC3]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC4]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC5]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC6]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC7]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC8]={d='on'},
 [0x2FC9]={d='on'},
 [0x2FCA]={d='on'},
 [0x2FCB]={d='on'},
 [0x2FCC]={d='on'},
 [0x2FCD]={d='on'},
 [0x2FCE]={d='on'},
 [0x2FCF]={d='on'},
 [0x2FD0]={d='on'},
 [0x2FD1]={d='on'},
 [0x2FD2]={d='on'},
 [0x2FD3]={d='on'},
 [0x2FD4]={d='on'},
 [0x2FD5]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF0]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF1]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF2]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF3]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF4]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF5]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF6]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF7]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF8]={d='on'},
 [0x2FF9]={d='on'},
 [0x2FFA]={d='on'},
 [0x2FFB]={d='on'},
 [0x3000]={d='ws'},
 [0x3001]={d='on'},
 [0x3002]={d='on'},
 [0x3003]={d='on'},
 [0x3004]={d='on'},
 [0x3008]={d='on', m=0x3009},
 [0x3009]={d='on', m=0x3008},
 [0x300A]={d='on', m=0x300B},
 [0x300B]={d='on', m=0x300A},
 [0x300C]={d='on', m=0x300D},
 [0x300D]={d='on', m=0x300C},
 [0x300E]={d='on', m=0x300F},
 [0x300F]={d='on', m=0x300E},
 [0x3010]={d='on', m=0x3011},
 [0x3011]={d='on', m=0x3010},
 [0x3012]={d='on'},
 [0x3013]={d='on'},
 [0x3014]={d='on', m=0x3015},
 [0x3015]={d='on', m=0x3014},
 [0x3016]={d='on', m=0x3017},
 [0x3017]={d='on', m=0x3016},
 [0x3018]={d='on', m=0x3019},
 [0x3019]={d='on', m=0x3018},
 [0x301A]={d='on', m=0x301B},
 [0x301B]={d='on', m=0x301A},
 [0x301C]={d='on'},
 [0x301D]={d='on'},
 [0x301E]={d='on'},
 [0x301F]={d='on'},
 [0x3020]={d='on'},
 [0x302A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x302B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x302C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x302D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x3030]={d='on'},
 [0x3036]={d='on'},
 [0x3037]={d='on'},
 [0x303D]={d='on'},
 [0x303E]={d='on'},
 [0x303F]={d='on'},
 [0x3099]={d='nsm'},
 [0x309A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x309B]={d='on'},
 [0x309C]={d='on'},
 [0x30A0]={d='on'},
 [0x30FB]={d='on'},
 [0x31C0]={d='on'},
 [0x31C1]={d='on'},
 [0x31C2]={d='on'},
 [0x31C3]={d='on'},
 [0x31C4]={d='on'},
 [0x31C5]={d='on'},
 [0x31C6]={d='on'},
 [0x31C7]={d='on'},
 [0x31C8]={d='on'},
 [0x31C9]={d='on'},
 [0x31CA]={d='on'},
 [0x31CB]={d='on'},
 [0x31CC]={d='on'},
 [0x31CD]={d='on'},
 [0x31CE]={d='on'},
 [0x31CF]={d='on'},
 [0x31D0]={d='on'},
 [0x31D1]={d='on'},
 [0x31D2]={d='on'},
 [0x31D3]={d='on'},
 [0x31D4]={d='on'},
 [0x31D5]={d='on'},
 [0x31D6]={d='on'},
 [0x31D7]={d='on'},
 [0x31D8]={d='on'},
 [0x31D9]={d='on'},
 [0x31DA]={d='on'},
 [0x31DB]={d='on'},
 [0x31DC]={d='on'},
 [0x31DD]={d='on'},
 [0x31DE]={d='on'},
 [0x31DF]={d='on'},
 [0x31E0]={d='on'},
 [0x31E1]={d='on'},
 [0x31E2]={d='on'},
 [0x31E3]={d='on'},
 [0x321D]={d='on'},
 [0x321E]={d='on'},
 [0x3250]={d='on'},
 [0x3251]={d='on'},
 [0x3252]={d='on'},
 [0x3253]={d='on'},
 [0x3254]={d='on'},
 [0x3255]={d='on'},
 [0x3256]={d='on'},
 [0x3257]={d='on'},
 [0x3258]={d='on'},
 [0x3259]={d='on'},
 [0x325A]={d='on'},
 [0x325B]={d='on'},
 [0x325C]={d='on'},
 [0x325D]={d='on'},
 [0x325E]={d='on'},
 [0x325F]={d='on'},
 [0x327C]={d='on'},
 [0x327D]={d='on'},
 [0x327E]={d='on'},
 [0x32B1]={d='on'},
 [0x32B2]={d='on'},
 [0x32B3]={d='on'},
 [0x32B4]={d='on'},
 [0x32B5]={d='on'},
 [0x32B6]={d='on'},
 [0x32B7]={d='on'},
 [0x32B8]={d='on'},
 [0x32B9]={d='on'},
 [0x32BA]={d='on'},
 [0x32BB]={d='on'},
 [0x32BC]={d='on'},
 [0x32BD]={d='on'},
 [0x32BE]={d='on'},
 [0x32BF]={d='on'},
 [0x32CC]={d='on'},
 [0x32CD]={d='on'},
 [0x32CE]={d='on'},
 [0x32CF]={d='on'},
 [0x3377]={d='on'},
 [0x3378]={d='on'},
 [0x3379]={d='on'},
 [0x337A]={d='on'},
 [0x33DE]={d='on'},
 [0x33DF]={d='on'},
 [0x33FF]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC0]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC1]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC2]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC3]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC4]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC5]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC6]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC7]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC8]={d='on'},
 [0x4DC9]={d='on'},
 [0x4DCA]={d='on'},
 [0x4DCB]={d='on'},
 [0x4DCC]={d='on'},
 [0x4DCD]={d='on'},
 [0x4DCE]={d='on'},
 [0x4DCF]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD0]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD1]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD2]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD3]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD4]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD5]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD6]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD7]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD8]={d='on'},
 [0x4DD9]={d='on'},
 [0x4DDA]={d='on'},
 [0x4DDB]={d='on'},
 [0x4DDC]={d='on'},
 [0x4DDD]={d='on'},
 [0x4DDE]={d='on'},
 [0x4DDF]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE0]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE1]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE2]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE3]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE4]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE5]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE6]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE7]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE8]={d='on'},
 [0x4DE9]={d='on'},
 [0x4DEA]={d='on'},
 [0x4DEB]={d='on'},
 [0x4DEC]={d='on'},
 [0x4DED]={d='on'},
 [0x4DEE]={d='on'},
 [0x4DEF]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF0]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF1]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF2]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF3]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF4]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF5]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF6]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF7]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF8]={d='on'},
 [0x4DF9]={d='on'},
 [0x4DFA]={d='on'},
 [0x4DFB]={d='on'},
 [0x4DFC]={d='on'},
 [0x4DFD]={d='on'},
 [0x4DFE]={d='on'},
 [0x4DFF]={d='on'},
 [0xA490]={d='on'},
 [0xA491]={d='on'},
 [0xA492]={d='on'},
 [0xA493]={d='on'},
 [0xA494]={d='on'},
 [0xA495]={d='on'},
 [0xA496]={d='on'},
 [0xA497]={d='on'},
 [0xA498]={d='on'},
 [0xA499]={d='on'},
 [0xA49A]={d='on'},
 [0xA49B]={d='on'},
 [0xA49C]={d='on'},
 [0xA49D]={d='on'},
 [0xA49E]={d='on'},
 [0xA49F]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A0]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A1]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A2]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A3]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A4]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A5]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A6]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A7]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A8]={d='on'},
 [0xA4A9]={d='on'},
 [0xA4AA]={d='on'},
 [0xA4AB]={d='on'},
 [0xA4AC]={d='on'},
 [0xA4AD]={d='on'},
 [0xA4AE]={d='on'},
 [0xA4AF]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B0]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B1]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B2]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B3]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B4]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B5]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B6]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B7]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B8]={d='on'},
 [0xA4B9]={d='on'},
 [0xA4BA]={d='on'},
 [0xA4BB]={d='on'},
 [0xA4BC]={d='on'},
 [0xA4BD]={d='on'},
 [0xA4BE]={d='on'},
 [0xA4BF]={d='on'},
 [0xA4C0]={d='on'},
 [0xA4C1]={d='on'},
 [0xA4C2]={d='on'},
 [0xA4C3]={d='on'},
 [0xA4C4]={d='on'},
 [0xA4C5]={d='on'},
 [0xA4C6]={d='on'},
 [0xA60D]={d='on'},
 [0xA60E]={d='on'},
 [0xA60F]={d='on'},
 [0xA66F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA670]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA671]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA672]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA673]={d='on'},
 [0xA674]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA675]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA676]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA677]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA678]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA679]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA67A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA67B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA67C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA67D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA67E]={d='on'},
 [0xA67F]={d='on'},
 [0xA69E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA69F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA6F0]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA6F1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA700]={d='on'},
 [0xA701]={d='on'},
 [0xA702]={d='on'},
 [0xA703]={d='on'},
 [0xA704]={d='on'},
 [0xA705]={d='on'},
 [0xA706]={d='on'},
 [0xA707]={d='on'},
 [0xA708]={d='on'},
 [0xA709]={d='on'},
 [0xA70A]={d='on'},
 [0xA70B]={d='on'},
 [0xA70C]={d='on'},
 [0xA70D]={d='on'},
 [0xA70E]={d='on'},
 [0xA70F]={d='on'},
 [0xA710]={d='on'},
 [0xA711]={d='on'},
 [0xA712]={d='on'},
 [0xA713]={d='on'},
 [0xA714]={d='on'},
 [0xA715]={d='on'},
 [0xA716]={d='on'},
 [0xA717]={d='on'},
 [0xA718]={d='on'},
 [0xA719]={d='on'},
 [0xA71A]={d='on'},
 [0xA71B]={d='on'},
 [0xA71C]={d='on'},
 [0xA71D]={d='on'},
 [0xA71E]={d='on'},
 [0xA71F]={d='on'},
 [0xA720]={d='on'},
 [0xA721]={d='on'},
 [0xA788]={d='on'},
 [0xA802]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA806]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA80B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA825]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA826]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA828]={d='on'},
 [0xA829]={d='on'},
 [0xA82A]={d='on'},
 [0xA82B]={d='on'},
 [0xA838]={d='et'},
 [0xA839]={d='et'},
 [0xA874]={d='on'},
 [0xA875]={d='on'},
 [0xA876]={d='on'},
 [0xA877]={d='on'},
 [0xA8C4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8C5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E0]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E6]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E7]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8E9]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8EA]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8EB]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8EC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8ED]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8EE]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8EF]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8F0]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA8F1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA926]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA927]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA928]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA929]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA92A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA92B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA92C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA92D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA947]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA948]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA949]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA94A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA94B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA94C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA94D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA94E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA94F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA950]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA951]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA980]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA981]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA982]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA9B3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA9B6]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA9B7]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA9B8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA9B9]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA9BC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xA9E5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA29]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA2A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA2B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA2C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA2D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA2E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA31]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA32]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA35]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA36]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA43]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA4C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAA7C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAB0]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAB2]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAB3]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAB4]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAB7]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAB8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAABE]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAABF]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAC1]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAEC]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAED]={d='nsm'},
 [0xAAF6]={d='nsm'},
 [0xABE5]={d='nsm'},
 [0xABE8]={d='nsm'},
 [0xABED]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB1E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFB29]={d='es'},
 [0xFD3E]={d='on'},
 [0xFD3F]={d='on'},
 [0xFDFD]={d='on'},
 [0xFE10]={d='on'},
 [0xFE11]={d='on'},
 [0xFE12]={d='on'},
 [0xFE13]={d='on'},
 [0xFE14]={d='on'},
 [0xFE15]={d='on'},
 [0xFE16]={d='on'},
 [0xFE17]={d='on'},
 [0xFE18]={d='on'},
 [0xFE19]={d='on'},
 [0xFE20]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE21]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE22]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE23]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE24]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE25]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE26]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE27]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE28]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE29]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE2A]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE2B]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE2C]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE2D]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE2E]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE2F]={d='nsm'},
 [0xFE30]={d='on'},
 [0xFE31]={d='on'},
 [0xFE32]={d='on'},
 [0xFE33]={d='on'},
 [0xFE34]={d='on'},
 [0xFE35]={d='on'},
 [0xFE36]={d='on'},
 [0xFE37]={d='on'},
 [0xFE38]={d='on'},
 [0xFE39]={d='on'},
 [0xFE3A]={d='on'},
 [0xFE3B]={d='on'},
 [0xFE3C]={d='on'},
 [0xFE3D]={d='on'},
 [0xFE3E]={d='on'},
 [0xFE3F]={d='on'},
 [0xFE40]={d='on'},
 [0xFE41]={d='on'},
 [0xFE42]={d='on'},
 [0xFE43]={d='on'},
 [0xFE44]={d='on'},
 [0xFE45]={d='on'},
 [0xFE46]={d='on'},
 [0xFE47]={d='on'},
 [0xFE48]={d='on'},
 [0xFE49]={d='on'},
 [0xFE4A]={d='on'},
 [0xFE4B]={d='on'},
 [0xFE4C]={d='on'},
 [0xFE4D]={d='on'},
 [0xFE4E]={d='on'},
 [0xFE4F]={d='on'},
 [0xFE50]={d='cs'},
 [0xFE51]={d='on'},
 [0xFE52]={d='cs'},
 [0xFE54]={d='on'},
 [0xFE55]={d='cs'},
 [0xFE56]={d='on'},
 [0xFE57]={d='on'},
 [0xFE58]={d='on'},
 [0xFE59]={d='on', m=0xFE5A},
 [0xFE5A]={d='on', m=0xFE59},
 [0xFE5B]={d='on', m=0xFE5C},
 [0xFE5C]={d='on', m=0xFE5B},
 [0xFE5D]={d='on', m=0xFE5E},
 [0xFE5E]={d='on', m=0xFE5D},
 [0xFE5F]={d='et'},
 [0xFE60]={d='on'},
 [0xFE61]={d='on'},
 [0xFE62]={d='es'},
 [0xFE63]={d='es'},
 [0xFE64]={d='on', m=0xFE65},
 [0xFE65]={d='on', m=0xFE64},
 [0xFE66]={d='on'},
 [0xFE68]={d='on'},
 [0xFE69]={d='et'},
 [0xFE6A]={d='et'},
 [0xFE6B]={d='on'},
 [0xFEFF]={d='bn'},
 [0xFF01]={d='on'},
 [0xFF02]={d='on'},
 [0xFF03]={d='et'},
 [0xFF04]={d='et'},
 [0xFF05]={d='et'},
 [0xFF06]={d='on'},
 [0xFF07]={d='on'},
 [0xFF08]={d='on', m=0xFF09},
 [0xFF09]={d='on', m=0xFF08},
 [0xFF0A]={d='on'},
 [0xFF0B]={d='es'},
 [0xFF0C]={d='cs'},
 [0xFF0D]={d='es'},
 [0xFF0E]={d='cs'},
 [0xFF0F]={d='cs'},
 [0xFF10]={d='en'},
 [0xFF11]={d='en'},
 [0xFF12]={d='en'},
 [0xFF13]={d='en'},
 [0xFF14]={d='en'},
 [0xFF15]={d='en'},
 [0xFF16]={d='en'},
 [0xFF17]={d='en'},
 [0xFF18]={d='en'},
 [0xFF19]={d='en'},
 [0xFF1A]={d='cs'},
 [0xFF1B]={d='on'},
 [0xFF1C]={d='on', m=0xFF1E},
 [0xFF1D]={d='on'},
 [0xFF1E]={d='on', m=0xFF1C},
 [0xFF1F]={d='on'},
 [0xFF20]={d='on'},
 [0xFF3B]={d='on', m=0xFF3D},
 [0xFF3C]={d='on'},
 [0xFF3D]={d='on', m=0xFF3B},
 [0xFF3E]={d='on'},
 [0xFF3F]={d='on'},
 [0xFF40]={d='on'},
 [0xFF5B]={d='on', m=0xFF5D},
 [0xFF5C]={d='on'},
 [0xFF5D]={d='on', m=0xFF5B},
 [0xFF5E]={d='on'},
 [0xFF5F]={d='on', m=0xFF60},
 [0xFF60]={d='on', m=0xFF5F},
 [0xFF61]={d='on'},
 [0xFF62]={d='on', m=0xFF63},
 [0xFF63]={d='on', m=0xFF62},
 [0xFF64]={d='on'},
 [0xFF65]={d='on'},
 [0xFFE0]={d='et'},
 [0xFFE1]={d='et'},
 [0xFFE2]={d='on'},
 [0xFFE3]={d='on'},
 [0xFFE4]={d='on'},
 [0xFFE5]={d='et'},
 [0xFFE6]={d='et'},
 [0xFFE8]={d='on'},
 [0xFFE9]={d='on'},
 [0xFFEA]={d='on'},
 [0xFFEB]={d='on'},
 [0xFFEC]={d='on'},
 [0xFFED]={d='on'},
 [0xFFEE]={d='on'},
 [0xFFF9]={d='on'},
 [0xFFFA]={d='on'},
 [0xFFFB]={d='on'},
 [0xFFFC]={d='on'},
 [0xFFFD]={d='on'},
 [0x10101]={d='on'},
 [0x10140]={d='on'},
 [0x10141]={d='on'},
 [0x10142]={d='on'},
 [0x10143]={d='on'},
 [0x10144]={d='on'},
 [0x10145]={d='on'},
 [0x10146]={d='on'},
 [0x10147]={d='on'},
 [0x10148]={d='on'},
 [0x10149]={d='on'},
 [0x1014A]={d='on'},
 [0x1014B]={d='on'},
 [0x1014C]={d='on'},
 [0x1014D]={d='on'},
 [0x1014E]={d='on'},
 [0x1014F]={d='on'},
 [0x10150]={d='on'},
 [0x10151]={d='on'},
 [0x10152]={d='on'},
 [0x10153]={d='on'},
 [0x10154]={d='on'},
 [0x10155]={d='on'},
 [0x10156]={d='on'},
 [0x10157]={d='on'},
 [0x10158]={d='on'},
 [0x10159]={d='on'},
 [0x1015A]={d='on'},
 [0x1015B]={d='on'},
 [0x1015C]={d='on'},
 [0x1015D]={d='on'},
 [0x1015E]={d='on'},
 [0x1015F]={d='on'},
 [0x10160]={d='on'},
 [0x10161]={d='on'},
 [0x10162]={d='on'},
 [0x10163]={d='on'},
 [0x10164]={d='on'},
 [0x10165]={d='on'},
 [0x10166]={d='on'},
 [0x10167]={d='on'},
 [0x10168]={d='on'},
 [0x10169]={d='on'},
 [0x1016A]={d='on'},
 [0x1016B]={d='on'},
 [0x1016C]={d='on'},
 [0x1016D]={d='on'},
 [0x1016E]={d='on'},
 [0x1016F]={d='on'},
 [0x10170]={d='on'},
 [0x10171]={d='on'},
 [0x10172]={d='on'},
 [0x10173]={d='on'},
 [0x10174]={d='on'},
 [0x10175]={d='on'},
 [0x10176]={d='on'},
 [0x10177]={d='on'},
 [0x10178]={d='on'},
 [0x10179]={d='on'},
 [0x1017A]={d='on'},
 [0x1017B]={d='on'},
 [0x1017C]={d='on'},
 [0x1017D]={d='on'},
 [0x1017E]={d='on'},
 [0x1017F]={d='on'},
 [0x10180]={d='on'},
 [0x10181]={d='on'},
 [0x10182]={d='on'},
 [0x10183]={d='on'},
 [0x10184]={d='on'},
 [0x10185]={d='on'},
 [0x10186]={d='on'},
 [0x10187]={d='on'},
 [0x10188]={d='on'},
 [0x10189]={d='on'},
 [0x1018A]={d='on'},
 [0x1018B]={d='on'},
 [0x1018C]={d='on'},
 [0x10190]={d='on'},
 [0x10191]={d='on'},
 [0x10192]={d='on'},
 [0x10193]={d='on'},
 [0x10194]={d='on'},
 [0x10195]={d='on'},
 [0x10196]={d='on'},
 [0x10197]={d='on'},
 [0x10198]={d='on'},
 [0x10199]={d='on'},
 [0x1019A]={d='on'},
 [0x1019B]={d='on'},
 [0x101A0]={d='on'},
 [0x101FD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x102E0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x102E1]={d='en'},
 [0x102E2]={d='en'},
 [0x102E3]={d='en'},
 [0x102E4]={d='en'},
 [0x102E5]={d='en'},
 [0x102E6]={d='en'},
 [0x102E7]={d='en'},
 [0x102E8]={d='en'},
 [0x102E9]={d='en'},
 [0x102EA]={d='en'},
 [0x102EB]={d='en'},
 [0x102EC]={d='en'},
 [0x102ED]={d='en'},
 [0x102EE]={d='en'},
 [0x102EF]={d='en'},
 [0x102F0]={d='en'},
 [0x102F1]={d='en'},
 [0x102F2]={d='en'},
 [0x102F3]={d='en'},
 [0x102F4]={d='en'},
 [0x102F5]={d='en'},
 [0x102F6]={d='en'},
 [0x102F7]={d='en'},
 [0x102F8]={d='en'},
 [0x102F9]={d='en'},
 [0x102FA]={d='en'},
 [0x102FB]={d='en'},
 [0x10376]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10377]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10378]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10379]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1037A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1091F]={d='on'},
 [0x10A01]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A02]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A03]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A05]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A06]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A0C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A0D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A0E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A0F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A38]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A39]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A3A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10A3F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10AE5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10AE6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x10B39]={d='on'},
 [0x10B3A]={d='on'},
 [0x10B3B]={d='on'},
 [0x10B3C]={d='on'},
 [0x10B3D]={d='on'},
 [0x10B3E]={d='on'},
 [0x10B3F]={d='on'},
 [0x10C80]={d='r'},
 [0x10C81]={d='r'},
 [0x10C82]={d='r'},
 [0x10C83]={d='r'},
 [0x10C84]={d='r'},
 [0x10C85]={d='r'},
 [0x10C86]={d='r'},
 [0x10C87]={d='r'},
 [0x10C88]={d='r'},
 [0x10C89]={d='r'},
 [0x10C8A]={d='r'},
 [0x10C8B]={d='r'},
 [0x10C8C]={d='r'},
 [0x10C8D]={d='r'},
 [0x10C8E]={d='r'},
 [0x10C8F]={d='r'},
 [0x10C90]={d='r'},
 [0x10C91]={d='r'},
 [0x10C92]={d='r'},
 [0x10C93]={d='r'},
 [0x10C94]={d='r'},
 [0x10C95]={d='r'},
 [0x10C96]={d='r'},
 [0x10C97]={d='r'},
 [0x10C98]={d='r'},
 [0x10C99]={d='r'},
 [0x10C9A]={d='r'},
 [0x10C9B]={d='r'},
 [0x10C9C]={d='r'},
 [0x10C9D]={d='r'},
 [0x10C9E]={d='r'},
 [0x10C9F]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA0]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA1]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA2]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA3]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA4]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA5]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA6]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA7]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA8]={d='r'},
 [0x10CA9]={d='r'},
 [0x10CAA]={d='r'},
 [0x10CAB]={d='r'},
 [0x10CAC]={d='r'},
 [0x10CAD]={d='r'},
 [0x10CAE]={d='r'},
 [0x10CAF]={d='r'},
 [0x10CB0]={d='r'},
 [0x10CB1]={d='r'},
 [0x10CB2]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC0]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC1]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC2]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC3]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC4]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC5]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC6]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC7]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC8]={d='r'},
 [0x10CC9]={d='r'},
 [0x10CCA]={d='r'},
 [0x10CCB]={d='r'},
 [0x10CCC]={d='r'},
 [0x10CCD]={d='r'},
 [0x10CCE]={d='r'},
 [0x10CCF]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD0]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD1]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD2]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD3]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD4]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD5]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD6]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD7]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD8]={d='r'},
 [0x10CD9]={d='r'},
 [0x10CDA]={d='r'},
 [0x10CDB]={d='r'},
 [0x10CDC]={d='r'},
 [0x10CDD]={d='r'},
 [0x10CDE]={d='r'},
 [0x10CDF]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE0]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE1]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE2]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE3]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE4]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE5]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE6]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE7]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE8]={d='r'},
 [0x10CE9]={d='r'},
 [0x10CEA]={d='r'},
 [0x10CEB]={d='r'},
 [0x10CEC]={d='r'},
 [0x10CED]={d='r'},
 [0x10CEE]={d='r'},
 [0x10CEF]={d='r'},
 [0x10CF0]={d='r'},
 [0x10CF1]={d='r'},
 [0x10CF2]={d='r'},
 [0x10CFA]={d='r'},
 [0x10CFB]={d='r'},
 [0x10CFC]={d='r'},
 [0x10CFD]={d='r'},
 [0x10CFE]={d='r'},
 [0x10CFF]={d='r'},
 [0x10E60]={d='an'},
 [0x10E61]={d='an'},
 [0x10E62]={d='an'},
 [0x10E63]={d='an'},
 [0x10E64]={d='an'},
 [0x10E65]={d='an'},
 [0x10E66]={d='an'},
 [0x10E67]={d='an'},
 [0x10E68]={d='an'},
 [0x10E69]={d='an'},
 [0x10E6A]={d='an'},
 [0x10E6B]={d='an'},
 [0x10E6C]={d='an'},
 [0x10E6D]={d='an'},
 [0x10E6E]={d='an'},
 [0x10E6F]={d='an'},
 [0x10E70]={d='an'},
 [0x10E71]={d='an'},
 [0x10E72]={d='an'},
 [0x10E73]={d='an'},
 [0x10E74]={d='an'},
 [0x10E75]={d='an'},
 [0x10E76]={d='an'},
 [0x10E77]={d='an'},
 [0x10E78]={d='an'},
 [0x10E79]={d='an'},
 [0x10E7A]={d='an'},
 [0x10E7B]={d='an'},
 [0x10E7C]={d='an'},
 [0x10E7D]={d='an'},
 [0x10E7E]={d='an'},
 [0x11001]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11038]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11039]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1103A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1103B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1103C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1103D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1103E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1103F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11040]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11041]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11042]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11043]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11044]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11045]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11046]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11052]={d='on'},
 [0x11053]={d='on'},
 [0x11054]={d='on'},
 [0x11055]={d='on'},
 [0x11056]={d='on'},
 [0x11057]={d='on'},
 [0x11058]={d='on'},
 [0x11059]={d='on'},
 [0x1105A]={d='on'},
 [0x1105B]={d='on'},
 [0x1105C]={d='on'},
 [0x1105D]={d='on'},
 [0x1105E]={d='on'},
 [0x1105F]={d='on'},
 [0x11060]={d='on'},
 [0x11061]={d='on'},
 [0x11062]={d='on'},
 [0x11063]={d='on'},
 [0x11064]={d='on'},
 [0x11065]={d='on'},
 [0x1107F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11080]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11081]={d='nsm'},
 [0x110B3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x110B4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x110B5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x110B6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x110B9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x110BA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11100]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11101]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11102]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11127]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11128]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11129]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1112A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1112B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1112D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1112E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1112F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11130]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11131]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11132]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11133]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11134]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11173]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11180]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11181]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111B6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111B7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111B8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111B9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111BA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111BB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111BC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111BD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111BE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111CA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111CB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x111CC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1122F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11230]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11231]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11234]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11236]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11237]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1123E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112DF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112E3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112E4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112E5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112E6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112E7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112E8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112E9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x112EA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11300]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11301]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1133C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11340]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11366]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11367]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11368]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11369]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1136A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1136B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1136C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11370]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11371]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11372]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11373]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11374]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11438]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11439]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1143A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1143B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1143C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1143D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1143E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1143F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11442]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11443]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11444]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11446]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114B3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114B4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114B5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114B6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114B7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114B8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114BA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114BF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114C0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114C2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x114C3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115B2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115B3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115B4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115B5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115BC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115BD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115BF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115C0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115DC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x115DD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11633]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11634]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11635]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11636]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11637]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11638]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11639]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1163A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1163D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1163F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11640]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11660]={d='on'},
 [0x11661]={d='on'},
 [0x11662]={d='on'},
 [0x11663]={d='on'},
 [0x11664]={d='on'},
 [0x11665]={d='on'},
 [0x11666]={d='on'},
 [0x11667]={d='on'},
 [0x11668]={d='on'},
 [0x11669]={d='on'},
 [0x1166A]={d='on'},
 [0x1166B]={d='on'},
 [0x1166C]={d='on'},
 [0x116AB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116AD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116B0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116B1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116B2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116B3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116B4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116B5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x116B7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1171D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1171E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1171F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11722]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11723]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11724]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11725]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11727]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11728]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11729]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1172A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1172B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C30]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C31]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C32]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C33]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C34]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C35]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C36]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C38]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C39]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C3A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C3B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C3C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C3D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C92]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C93]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C94]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C95]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C96]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C97]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C98]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C99]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C9A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C9B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C9C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C9D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C9E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11C9F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CA7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CAA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CAB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CAC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CAD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CAE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CAF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CB0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CB2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CB3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CB5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x11CB6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16AF0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16AF1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16AF2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16AF3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16AF4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16B30]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16B31]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16B32]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16B33]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16B34]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16B35]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16B36]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16F8F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16F90]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16F91]={d='nsm'},
 [0x16F92]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BC9D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BC9E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1BCA0]={d='bn'},
 [0x1BCA1]={d='bn'},
 [0x1BCA2]={d='bn'},
 [0x1BCA3]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D167]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D168]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D169]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D173]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D174]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D175]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D176]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D177]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D178]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D179]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D17A]={d='bn'},
 [0x1D17B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D17C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D17D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D17E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D17F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D180]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D181]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D182]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D185]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D186]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D187]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D188]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D189]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D18A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D18B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D1AA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D1AB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D1AC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D1AD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D200]={d='on'},
 [0x1D201]={d='on'},
 [0x1D202]={d='on'},
 [0x1D203]={d='on'},
 [0x1D204]={d='on'},
 [0x1D205]={d='on'},
 [0x1D206]={d='on'},
 [0x1D207]={d='on'},
 [0x1D208]={d='on'},
 [0x1D209]={d='on'},
 [0x1D20A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D20B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D20C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D20D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D20E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D20F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D210]={d='on'},
 [0x1D211]={d='on'},
 [0x1D212]={d='on'},
 [0x1D213]={d='on'},
 [0x1D214]={d='on'},
 [0x1D215]={d='on'},
 [0x1D216]={d='on'},
 [0x1D217]={d='on'},
 [0x1D218]={d='on'},
 [0x1D219]={d='on'},
 [0x1D21A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D21B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D21C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D21D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D21E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D21F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D220]={d='on'},
 [0x1D221]={d='on'},
 [0x1D222]={d='on'},
 [0x1D223]={d='on'},
 [0x1D224]={d='on'},
 [0x1D225]={d='on'},
 [0x1D226]={d='on'},
 [0x1D227]={d='on'},
 [0x1D228]={d='on'},
 [0x1D229]={d='on'},
 [0x1D22A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D22B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D22C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D22D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D22E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D22F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D230]={d='on'},
 [0x1D231]={d='on'},
 [0x1D232]={d='on'},
 [0x1D233]={d='on'},
 [0x1D234]={d='on'},
 [0x1D235]={d='on'},
 [0x1D236]={d='on'},
 [0x1D237]={d='on'},
 [0x1D238]={d='on'},
 [0x1D239]={d='on'},
 [0x1D23A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D23B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D23C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D23D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D23E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D23F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D240]={d='on'},
 [0x1D241]={d='on'},
 [0x1D242]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D243]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D244]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1D245]={d='on'},
 [0x1D300]={d='on'},
 [0x1D301]={d='on'},
 [0x1D302]={d='on'},
 [0x1D303]={d='on'},
 [0x1D304]={d='on'},
 [0x1D305]={d='on'},
 [0x1D306]={d='on'},
 [0x1D307]={d='on'},
 [0x1D308]={d='on'},
 [0x1D309]={d='on'},
 [0x1D30A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D30B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D30C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D30D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D30E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D30F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D310]={d='on'},
 [0x1D311]={d='on'},
 [0x1D312]={d='on'},
 [0x1D313]={d='on'},
 [0x1D314]={d='on'},
 [0x1D315]={d='on'},
 [0x1D316]={d='on'},
 [0x1D317]={d='on'},
 [0x1D318]={d='on'},
 [0x1D319]={d='on'},
 [0x1D31A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D31B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D31C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D31D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D31E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D31F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D320]={d='on'},
 [0x1D321]={d='on'},
 [0x1D322]={d='on'},
 [0x1D323]={d='on'},
 [0x1D324]={d='on'},
 [0x1D325]={d='on'},
 [0x1D326]={d='on'},
 [0x1D327]={d='on'},
 [0x1D328]={d='on'},
 [0x1D329]={d='on'},
 [0x1D32A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D32B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D32C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D32D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D32E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D32F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D330]={d='on'},
 [0x1D331]={d='on'},
 [0x1D332]={d='on'},
 [0x1D333]={d='on'},
 [0x1D334]={d='on'},
 [0x1D335]={d='on'},
 [0x1D336]={d='on'},
 [0x1D337]={d='on'},
 [0x1D338]={d='on'},
 [0x1D339]={d='on'},
 [0x1D33A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D33B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D33C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D33D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D33E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D33F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D340]={d='on'},
 [0x1D341]={d='on'},
 [0x1D342]={d='on'},
 [0x1D343]={d='on'},
 [0x1D344]={d='on'},
 [0x1D345]={d='on'},
 [0x1D346]={d='on'},
 [0x1D347]={d='on'},
 [0x1D348]={d='on'},
 [0x1D349]={d='on'},
 [0x1D34A]={d='on'},
 [0x1D34B]={d='on'},
 [0x1D34C]={d='on'},
 [0x1D34D]={d='on'},
 [0x1D34E]={d='on'},
 [0x1D34F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D350]={d='on'},
 [0x1D351]={d='on'},
 [0x1D352]={d='on'},
 [0x1D353]={d='on'},
 [0x1D354]={d='on'},
 [0x1D355]={d='on'},
 [0x1D356]={d='on'},
 [0x1D6DB]={d='on'},
 [0x1D715]={d='on'},
 [0x1D74F]={d='on'},
 [0x1D789]={d='on'},
 [0x1D7C3]={d='on'},
 [0x1D7CE]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7CF]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D0]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D1]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D2]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D3]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D4]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D5]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D6]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D7]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D8]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7D9]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7DA]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7DB]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7DC]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7DD]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7DE]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7DF]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E0]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E1]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E2]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E3]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E4]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E5]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E6]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E7]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E8]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7E9]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7EA]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7EB]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7EC]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7ED]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7EE]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7EF]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F0]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F1]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F2]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F3]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F4]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F5]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F6]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F7]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F8]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7F9]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7FA]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7FB]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7FC]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7FD]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7FE]={d='en'},
 [0x1D7FF]={d='en'},
 [0x1DA00]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA01]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA02]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA03]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA04]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA05]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA06]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA07]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA08]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA09]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA0A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA0B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA0C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA0D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA0E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA0F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA10]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA11]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA12]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA13]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA14]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA15]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA16]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA17]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA18]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA19]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA1A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA1B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA1C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA1D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA1E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA1F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA20]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA21]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA22]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA23]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA24]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA25]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA26]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA27]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA28]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA29]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA2A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA2B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA2C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA2D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA2E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA2F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA30]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA31]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA32]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA33]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA34]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA35]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA36]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA3B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA3C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA3D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA3E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA3F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA40]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA41]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA42]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA43]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA44]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA45]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA46]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA47]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA48]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA49]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA4A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA4B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA4C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA4D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA4E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA4F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA50]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA51]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA52]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA53]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA54]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA55]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA56]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA57]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA58]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA59]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA5A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA5B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA5C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA5D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA5E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA5F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA60]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA61]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA62]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA63]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA64]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA65]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA66]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA67]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA68]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA69]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA6A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA6B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA6C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA75]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA84]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA9B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA9C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA9D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA9E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DA9F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA7]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA8]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAA9]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAAA]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAAB]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAAC]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAAD]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAAE]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1DAAF]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E000]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E001]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E002]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E003]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E004]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E005]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E006]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E008]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E009]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E00A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E00B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E00C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E00D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E00E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E00F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E010]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E011]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E012]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E013]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E014]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E015]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E016]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E017]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E018]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E01B]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E01C]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E01D]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E01E]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E01F]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E020]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E021]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E023]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E024]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E026]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E027]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E028]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E029]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E02A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E8D0]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E8D1]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E8D2]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E8D3]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E8D4]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E8D5]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E8D6]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E944]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E945]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E946]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E947]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E948]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E949]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1E94A]={d='nsm'},
 [0x1EE00]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE01]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE02]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE03]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE05]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE06]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE07]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE08]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE09]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE0A]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE0B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE0C]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE0D]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE0E]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE0F]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE10]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE11]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE12]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE13]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE14]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE15]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE16]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE17]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE18]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE19]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE1A]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE1B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE1C]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE1D]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE1E]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE1F]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE21]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE22]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE24]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE27]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE29]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE2A]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE2B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE2C]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE2D]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE2E]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE2F]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE30]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE31]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE32]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE34]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE35]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE36]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE37]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE39]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE3B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE42]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE47]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE49]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE4B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE4D]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE4E]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE4F]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE51]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE52]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE54]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE57]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE59]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE5B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE5D]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE5F]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE61]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE62]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE64]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE67]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE68]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE69]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE6A]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE6C]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE6D]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE6E]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE6F]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE70]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE71]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE72]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE74]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE75]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE76]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE77]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE79]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE7A]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE7B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE7C]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE7E]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE80]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE81]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE82]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE83]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE84]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE85]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE86]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE87]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE88]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE89]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE8B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE8C]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE8D]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE8E]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE8F]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE90]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE91]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE92]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE93]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE94]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE95]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE96]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE97]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE98]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE99]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE9A]={d='al'},
 [0x1EE9B]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA1]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA2]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA3]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA5]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA6]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA7]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA8]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEA9]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEAB]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEAC]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEAD]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEAE]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEAF]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB0]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB1]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB2]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB3]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB4]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB5]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB6]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB7]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB8]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEB9]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEBA]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEBB]={d='al'},
 [0x1EEF0]={d='on'},
 [0x1EEF1]={d='on'},
 [0x1F000]={d='on'},
 [0x1F001]={d='on'},
 [0x1F002]={d='on'},
 [0x1F003]={d='on'},
 [0x1F004]={d='on'},
 [0x1F005]={d='on'},
 [0x1F006]={d='on'},
 [0x1F007]={d='on'},
 [0x1F008]={d='on'},
 [0x1F009]={d='on'},
 [0x1F00A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F00B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F00C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F00D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F00E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F00F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F010]={d='on'},
 [0x1F011]={d='on'},
 [0x1F012]={d='on'},
 [0x1F013]={d='on'},
 [0x1F014]={d='on'},
 [0x1F015]={d='on'},
 [0x1F016]={d='on'},
 [0x1F017]={d='on'},
 [0x1F018]={d='on'},
 [0x1F019]={d='on'},
 [0x1F01A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F01B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F01C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F01D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F01E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F01F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F020]={d='on'},
 [0x1F021]={d='on'},
 [0x1F022]={d='on'},
 [0x1F023]={d='on'},
 [0x1F024]={d='on'},
 [0x1F025]={d='on'},
 [0x1F026]={d='on'},
 [0x1F027]={d='on'},
 [0x1F028]={d='on'},
 [0x1F029]={d='on'},
 [0x1F02A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F02B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F030]={d='on'},
 [0x1F031]={d='on'},
 [0x1F032]={d='on'},
 [0x1F033]={d='on'},
 [0x1F034]={d='on'},
 [0x1F035]={d='on'},
 [0x1F036]={d='on'},
 [0x1F037]={d='on'},
 [0x1F038]={d='on'},
 [0x1F039]={d='on'},
 [0x1F03A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F03B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F03C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F03D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F03E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F03F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F040]={d='on'},
 [0x1F041]={d='on'},
 [0x1F042]={d='on'},
 [0x1F043]={d='on'},
 [0x1F044]={d='on'},
 [0x1F045]={d='on'},
 [0x1F046]={d='on'},
 [0x1F047]={d='on'},
 [0x1F048]={d='on'},
 [0x1F049]={d='on'},
 [0x1F04A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F04B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F04C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F04D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F04E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F04F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F050]={d='on'},
 [0x1F051]={d='on'},
 [0x1F052]={d='on'},
 [0x1F053]={d='on'},
 [0x1F054]={d='on'},
 [0x1F055]={d='on'},
 [0x1F056]={d='on'},
 [0x1F057]={d='on'},
 [0x1F058]={d='on'},
 [0x1F059]={d='on'},
 [0x1F05A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F05B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F05C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F05D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F05E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F05F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F060]={d='on'},
 [0x1F061]={d='on'},
 [0x1F062]={d='on'},
 [0x1F063]={d='on'},
 [0x1F064]={d='on'},
 [0x1F065]={d='on'},
 [0x1F066]={d='on'},
 [0x1F067]={d='on'},
 [0x1F068]={d='on'},
 [0x1F069]={d='on'},
 [0x1F06A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F06B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F06C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F06D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F06E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F06F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F070]={d='on'},
 [0x1F071]={d='on'},
 [0x1F072]={d='on'},
 [0x1F073]={d='on'},
 [0x1F074]={d='on'},
 [0x1F075]={d='on'},
 [0x1F076]={d='on'},
 [0x1F077]={d='on'},
 [0x1F078]={d='on'},
 [0x1F079]={d='on'},
 [0x1F07A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F07B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F07C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F07D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F07E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F07F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F080]={d='on'},
 [0x1F081]={d='on'},
 [0x1F082]={d='on'},
 [0x1F083]={d='on'},
 [0x1F084]={d='on'},
 [0x1F085]={d='on'},
 [0x1F086]={d='on'},
 [0x1F087]={d='on'},
 [0x1F088]={d='on'},
 [0x1F089]={d='on'},
 [0x1F08A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F08B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F08C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F08D]={d='on'},
 [0x1F08E]={d='on'},
 [0x1F08F]={d='on'},
 [0x1F090]={d='on'},
 [0x1F091]={d='on'},
 [0x1F092]={d='on'},
 [0x1F093]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A0]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A1]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A2]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A3]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A4]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A5]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A6]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A7]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A8]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0A9]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0AA]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0AB]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0AC]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0AD]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0AE]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B1]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B2]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B3]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B4]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B5]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B6]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B7]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B8]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0B9]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0BA]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0BB]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0BC]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0BD]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0BE]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0BF]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C1]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C2]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C3]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C4]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C5]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C6]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C7]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C8]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0C9]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0CA]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0CB]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0CC]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0CD]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0CE]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0CF]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D1]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D2]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D3]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D4]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D5]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D6]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D7]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D8]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0D9]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0DA]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0DB]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0DC]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0DD]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0DE]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0DF]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E0]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E1]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E2]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E3]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E4]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E5]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E6]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E7]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E8]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0E9]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0EA]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0EB]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0EC]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0ED]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0EE]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0EF]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0F0]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0F1]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0F2]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0F3]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0F4]={d='on'},
 [0x1F0F5]={d='on'},
 [0x1F100]={d='en'},
 [0x1F101]={d='en'},
 [0x1F102]={d='en'},
 [0x1F103]={d='en'},
 [0x1F104]={d='en'},
 [0x1F105]={d='en'},
 [0x1F106]={d='en'},
 [0x1F107]={d='en'},
 [0x1F108]={d='en'},
 [0x1F109]={d='en'},
 [0x1F10A]={d='en'},
 [0x1F10B]={d='on'},
 [0x1F10C]={d='on'},
 [0x1F16A]={d='on'},
 [0x1F16B]={d='on'},
 [0xE0001]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0020]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0021]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0022]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0023]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0024]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0025]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0026]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0027]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0028]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0029]={d='bn'},
 [0xE002A]={d='bn'},
 [0xE002B]={d='bn'},
 [0xE002C]={d='bn'},
 [0xE002D]={d='bn'},
 [0xE002E]={d='bn'},
 [0xE002F]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0030]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0031]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0032]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0033]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0034]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0035]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0036]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0037]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0038]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0039]={d='bn'},
 [0xE003A]={d='bn'},
 [0xE003B]={d='bn'},
 [0xE003C]={d='bn'},
 [0xE003D]={d='bn'},
 [0xE003E]={d='bn'},
 [0xE003F]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0040]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0041]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0042]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0043]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0044]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0045]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0046]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0047]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0048]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0049]={d='bn'},
 [0xE004A]={d='bn'},
 [0xE004B]={d='bn'},
 [0xE004C]={d='bn'},
 [0xE004D]={d='bn'},
 [0xE004E]={d='bn'},
 [0xE004F]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0050]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0051]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0052]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0053]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0054]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0055]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0056]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0057]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0058]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0059]={d='bn'},
 [0xE005A]={d='bn'},
 [0xE005B]={d='bn'},
 [0xE005C]={d='bn'},
 [0xE005D]={d='bn'},
 [0xE005E]={d='bn'},
 [0xE005F]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0060]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0061]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0062]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0063]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0064]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0065]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0066]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0067]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0068]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0069]={d='bn'},
 [0xE006A]={d='bn'},
 [0xE006B]={d='bn'},
 [0xE006C]={d='bn'},
 [0xE006D]={d='bn'},
 [0xE006E]={d='bn'},
 [0xE006F]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0070]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0071]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0072]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0073]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0074]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0075]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0076]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0077]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0078]={d='bn'},
 [0xE0079]={d='bn'},
 [0xE007A]={d='bn'},
 [0xE007B]={d='bn'},
 [0xE007C]={d='bn'},
 [0xE007D]={d='bn'},
 [0xE007E]={d='bn'},
 [0xE007F]={d='bn'}
}
%</bidi>
%    \end{macrocode}
%\fi
%
% Now the |basic-r| bidi mode. One of the aims is to implement a fast
% and simple bidi algorithm, with a single loop. I managed to do it
% for R texts, with a second smaller loop for a special case. The code
% is still somewhat chaotic, but its behavior is essentially
% correct. I cannot resist copying the following text from
% \textsf{Emacs} |bidi.c| (which also attempts to implement the bidi
% algorithm with a single loop):
%
% \begin{quote}
%   Arrrgh!! The UAX\#9 algorithm is too deeply entrenched in the
%   assumption of batch-style processing [...]. May the fleas of a
%   thousand camels infest the armpits of those who design supposedly
%   general-purpose algorithms by looking at their own
%   implementations, and fail to consider other possible
%   implementations!
% \end{quote}
%
% Well, it took me some time to guess what the batch rules in UAX\#9
% actually mean (in other word, \textit{what} they do and\textit{why},
% and not only \textit{how}), but I think (or I hope) I've managed to
% understand them.
%
% In some sense, there are two bidi modes, one for numbers, and the
% other for text.  Furthermore, setting just the direction in R text
% is not enough, because there are actually \textit{two} R modes (set
% explicitly in Unicode with RLM and ALM). In \babel{} the dir is set
% by a higher protocol based on the language/script, which in turn
% sets the correct dir (<l>, <r> or <al>).
%
% From UAX\#9: “Where available, markup should be used instead of the
% explicit formatting characters”. So, this simple version just
% ignores formatting characters. Actually, most of that annex is
% devoted to how to handle them.
%
% BD14-BD16 are not implemented. Unicode (and the W3C) are making a
% great effort to deal with some special problematic cases in
% “streamed” plain text. I don't think this is the way to go --
% particular issues should be fixed by a high level interface taking
% into account the needs of the document. And here is where \luatex{}
% excels, because everything related to bidi writing is under our
% control.
%
% TODO: math mode (as weak L?)
%
% \changes{babel~3.20}{2018/05/01}{Adapted to exhyphens in luatex >=
%   1.07. Fix - now attr@dir is mod 3.}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*basic-r>
Babel = Babel or {}

require('babel-bidi.lua')

local characters = Babel.characters
local ranges = Babel.ranges

local DIR = node.id("dir")

local function dir_mark(head, from, to, outer)
  dir = (outer == 'r') and 'TLT' or 'TRT' -- ie, reverse
  local d = node.new(DIR)
  d.dir = '+' .. dir
  node.insert_before(head, from, d)
  d = node.new(DIR)
  d.dir = '-' .. dir
  node.insert_after(head, to, d)
end

function Babel.pre_otfload_v(head)
  -- head = Babel.numbers(head)
  head = Babel.bidi(head, true)
  return head
end

function Babel.pre_otfload_h(head)
  -- head = Babel.numbers(head)
  head = Babel.bidi(head, false)
  return head
end

function Babel.bidi(head, ispar)
  local first_n, last_n            -- first and last char with nums
  local last_es                    -- an auxiliary 'last' used with nums
  local first_d, last_d            -- first and last char in L/R block
  local dir, dir_real
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%   Next also depends on script/lang (<al>/<r>). To be set by
%   babel.  |tex.pardir| is dangerous, could be (re)set but it
%   should be changed only in vmode. There are two strong's --
%   |strong| = l/al/r and |strong_lr| = l/r (there must be a better
%   way):
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  local strong = ('TRT' == tex.pardir) and 'r' or 'l'
  local strong_lr = (strong == 'l') and 'l' or 'r'
  local outer = strong

  local new_dir = false
  local first_dir = false

  local last_lr

  local type_n = ''

  for item in node.traverse(head) do

    -- three cases: glyph, dir, otherwise
    if item.id == node.id'glyph'
      or (item.id == 7 and item.subtype == 2) then

      local itemchar
      if item.id == 7 and item.subtype == 2 then
        itemchar = item.replace.char
      else
        itemchar = item.char
      end
      local chardata = characters[itemchar]
      dir = chardata and chardata.d or nil
      if not dir then
        for nn, et in ipairs(ranges) do
          if itemchar < et[1] then
            break
          elseif itemchar <= et[2] then
            dir = et[3]
            break
          end
        end
      end
      dir = dir or 'l'
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%      Next is based on the assumption babel sets the language AND
%      switches the script with its dir. We treat a language block as
%      a separate Unicode sequence. The following piece of code is
%      executed at the first glyph after a `dir' node. We don't know
%      the current language until then.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      if new_dir then
        attr_dir = 0
        for at in node.traverse(item.attr) do
          if at.number == luatexbase.registernumber'bbl@attr@dir' then
            attr_dir = at.value % 3
          end
        end
        if attr_dir == 1 then
          strong = 'r'
        elseif attr_dir == 2 then
          strong = 'al'
        else
          strong = 'l'
        end
        strong_lr = (strong == 'l') and 'l' or 'r'
        outer = strong_lr
        new_dir = false
      end

      if dir == 'nsm' then dir = strong end             -- W1
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \textbf{Numbers.} The dual <al>/<r> system for R is somewhat
% cumbersome.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      dir_real = dir               -- We need dir_real to set strong below
      if dir == 'al' then dir = 'r' end -- W3
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% By W2, there are no <en> <et> <es> if |strong == <al>|, only
% <an>. Therefore, there are not <et en> nor <en et>, W5 can be
% ignored, and W6 applied:
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
      if strong == 'al' then
        if dir == 'en' then dir = 'an' end                -- W2
        if dir == 'et' or dir == 'es' then dir = 'on' end -- W6
        strong_lr = 'r'                                   -- W3
      end
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Once finished the basic setup for glyphs, consider the two other
% cases: dir node and the rest.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    elseif item.id == node.id'dir' then
      new_dir = true
      dir = nil
    else
      dir = nil          -- Not a char
    end
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Numbers in R mode. A sequence of <en>, <et>, <an>, <es> and <cs> is
% typeset (with some rules) in L mode. We store the starting and
% ending points, and only when anything different is found (including
% nil, ie, a non-char), the textdir is set. This means you cannot
% insert, say, a whatsit, but this is what I would expect (with
% \textsf{luacolor} you may colorize some digits). Anyway, this
% behavior could be changed with a switch in the future.  Note in the
% first branch only <an> is relevant if <al>.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    if dir == 'en' or dir == 'an' or dir == 'et' then
      if dir ~= 'et' then
        type_n = dir
      end
      first_n = first_n or item
      last_n = last_es or item
      last_es = nil
    elseif dir == 'es' and last_n then -- W3+W6
      last_es = item
    elseif dir == 'cs' then            -- it's right - do nothing
    elseif first_n then -- & if dir = any but en, et, an, es, cs, inc nil
      if strong_lr == 'r' and type_n ~= '' then
        dir_mark(head, first_n, last_n, 'r')
      elseif strong_lr == 'l' and first_d and type_n == 'an' then
        dir_mark(head, first_n, last_n, 'r')
        dir_mark(head, first_d, last_d, outer)
        first_d, last_d = nil, nil
      elseif strong_lr == 'l' and type_n ~= '' then
        last_d = last_n
      end
      type_n = ''
      first_n, last_n = nil, nil
    end
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% R text in L, or L text in R. Order of |dir_ mark|'s are relevant: d
% goes outside n, and therefore it's emitted after. See |dir_mark| to
% understand why (but is the nesting actually necessary or is a flat
% dir structure enough?). Only L, R (and AL) chars are taken into
% account -- everything else, including spaces, whatsits, etc., are
% ignored:
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    if dir == 'l' or dir == 'r' then
      if dir ~= outer then
        first_d = first_d or item
        last_d = item
      elseif first_d and dir ~= strong_lr then
        dir_mark(head, first_d, last_d, outer)
        first_d, last_d = nil, nil
     end
    end
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \textbf{Mirroring.}  Each chunk of text in a certain language is
% considered a ``closed'' sequence.  If <r on r> and <l on l>, it's
% clearly <r> and <l>, resptly, but with other combinations depends on
% outer. From all these, we select only those resolving <on> $\to$
% <r>. At the beginning (when |last_lr| is nil) of an R text, they are
% mirrored directly.
%
% TODO - numbers in R mode are processed. It doesn't hurt, but should
% not be done.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    if dir and not last_lr and dir ~= 'l' and outer == 'r' then
      item.char = characters[item.char] and
                  characters[item.char].m or item.char
    elseif (dir or new_dir) and last_lr ~= item then
      local mir = outer .. strong_lr .. (dir or outer)
      if mir == 'rrr' or mir == 'lrr' or mir == 'rrl' or mir == 'rlr' then
        for ch in node.traverse(node.next(last_lr)) do
          if ch == item then break end
          if ch.id == node.id'glyph' then
            ch.char = characters[ch.char].m or ch.char
          end
        end
      end
    end
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Save some values for the next iteration. If the current node is
% `dir', open a new sequence. Since dir could be changed, strong is
% set with its real value (|dir_real|).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    if dir == 'l' or dir == 'r' then
      last_lr = item
      strong = dir_real            -- Don't search back - best save now
      strong_lr = (strong == 'l') and 'l' or 'r'
    elseif new_dir then
      last_lr = nil
    end
  end
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% Mirror the last chars if they are no directed. And make sure any
% open block is closed, too.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  if last_lr and outer == 'r' then
    for ch in node.traverse_id(node.id'glyph', node.next(last_lr)) do
      ch.char = characters[ch.char].m or ch.char
    end
  end
  if first_n then
    dir_mark(head, first_n, last_n, outer)
  end
  if first_d then
    dir_mark(head, first_d, last_d, outer)
  end
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% In boxes, the dir node could be added before the original head, so
% the actual head is the previous node.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  return node.prev(head) or head
end
%</basic-r>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% And here the Lua code for |bidi=basic|:
% \changes{babel~3.20}{2018/05/01}{Adapted to exhyphens in luatex >=
%   1.07. Fix - nsm in mapfont (eg, Arabic vowels)}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*basic>
Babel = Babel or {}

Babel.fontmap = Babel.fontmap or {}
Babel.fontmap[0] = {}      -- l
Babel.fontmap[1] = {}      -- r
Babel.fontmap[2] = {}      -- al/an

function Babel.pre_otfload_v(head)
  -- head = Babel.numbers(head)
  head = Babel.bidi(head, true)
  return head
end

function Babel.pre_otfload_h(head, gc, sz, pt, dir)
  -- head = Babel.numbers(head)
  head = Babel.bidi(head, false, dir)
  return head
end

require('babel-bidi.lua')

local characters = Babel.characters
local ranges = Babel.ranges

local DIR = node.id('dir')
local GLYPH = node.id('glyph')

local function insert_implicit(head, state, outer)
  local new_state = state
  if state.sim and state.eim and state.sim ~= state.eim then
    dir = ((outer == 'r') and 'TLT' or 'TRT') -- ie, reverse
    local d = node.new(DIR)
    d.dir = '+' .. dir
    node.insert_before(head, state.sim, d)
    local d = node.new(DIR)
    d.dir = '-' .. dir
    node.insert_after(head, state.eim, d)
  end
  new_state.sim, new_state.eim = nil, nil
  return head, new_state
end

local function insert_numeric(head, state)
  local new
  local new_state = state
  if state.san and state.ean and state.san ~= state.ean then
    local d = node.new(DIR)
    d.dir = '+TLT'
    _, new = node.insert_before(head, state.san, d)
    if state.san == state.sim then state.sim = new end
    local d = node.new(DIR)
    d.dir = '-TLT'
    _, new = node.insert_after(head, state.ean, d)
    if state.ean == state.eim then state.eim = new end
  end
  new_state.san, new_state.ean = nil, nil
  return head, new_state
end

-- \hbox with an explicit dir can lead to wrong results
-- <R \hbox dir TLT{<R>}> and <L \hbox dir TRT{<L>}>

function Babel.bidi(head, ispar, hdir)
  local d   -- d is used mainly for computations in a loop
  local prev_d = ''
  local new_d = false

  local nodes = {}
  local outer_first = nil

  local has_en = false
  local first_et = nil

  local ATDIR = luatexbase.registernumber'bbl@attr@dir'

  local save_outer
  local temp = node.get_attribute(head, ATDIR)
  if temp then
    temp = temp % 3
    save_outer = (temp == 0 and 'l') or
                 (temp == 1 and 'r') or
                 (temp == 2 and 'al')
  elseif ispar then            -- Or error? Shouldn't happen
    save_outer = ('TRT' == tex.pardir) and 'r' or 'l'
  else
    save_outer = ('TRT' == hdir) and 'r' or 'l'
  end
  local outer = save_outer
  local last = outer
  -- 'al' is only taken into account in the first, current loop
  if save_outer == 'al' then save_outer = 'r' end

  local fontmap = Babel.fontmap

  for item in node.traverse(head) do

    -- In what follows, #node is the last (previous) node, because the
    -- current one is not added until we start processing the neutrals.

    -- three cases: glyph, dir, otherwise
    if item.id == GLYPH
       or (item.id == 7 and item.subtype == 2) then

      local d_font = nil
      local item_r
      if item.id == 7 and item.subtype == 2 then
        item_r = item.replace    -- automatic discs have just 1 glyph
      else
        item_r = item
      end
      local chardata = characters[item_r.char]
      d = chardata and chardata.d or nil
      if not d or d == 'nsm' then
        for nn, et in ipairs(ranges) do
          if item_r.char < et[1] then
            break
          elseif item_r.char <= et[2] then
            if not d then d = et[3]
            elseif d == 'nsm' then d_font = et[3]
            end
            break
          end
        end
      end
      d = d or 'l'
      d_font = d_font or d

      d_font = (d_font == 'l' and 0) or
               (d_font == 'nsm' and 0) or
               (d_font == 'r' and 1) or
               (d_font == 'al' and 2) or
               (d_font == 'an' and 2) or nil
      if d_font and fontmap and fontmap[d_font][item_r.font] then
        item_r.font = fontmap[d_font][item_r.font]
      end

      if new_d then
        table.insert(nodes, {nil, (outer == 'l') and 'l' or 'r', nil})
        attr_d = node.get_attribute(item, ATDIR)
        attr_d = attr_d % 3
        if attr_d == 1 then
          outer_first = 'r'
          last = 'r'
        elseif attr_d == 2 then
          outer_first = 'r'
          last = 'al'
        else
          outer_first = 'l'
          last = 'l'
        end
        outer = last
        has_en = false
        first_et = nil
        new_d = false
      end

    elseif item.id == DIR then
      d = nil
      new_d = true

    else
      d = nil
    end

    -- AL <= EN/ET/ES     -- W2 + W3 + W6
    if last == 'al' and d == 'en' then
      d = 'an'           -- W3
    elseif last == 'al' and (d == 'et' or d == 'es') then
      d = 'on'           -- W6
    end

    -- EN + CS/ES + EN     -- W4
    if d == 'en' and #nodes >= 2 then
      if (nodes[#nodes][2] == 'es' or nodes[#nodes][2] == 'cs')
          and nodes[#nodes-1][2] == 'en' then
        nodes[#nodes][2] = 'en'
      end
    end

    -- AN + CS + AN        -- W4 too, because uax9 mixes both cases
    if d == 'an' and #nodes >= 2 then
      if (nodes[#nodes][2] == 'cs')
          and nodes[#nodes-1][2] == 'an' then
        nodes[#nodes][2] = 'an'
      end
    end

    -- ET/EN               -- W5 + W7->l / W6->on
    if d == 'et' then
      first_et = first_et or (#nodes + 1)
    elseif d == 'en' then
      has_en = true
      first_et = first_et or (#nodes + 1)
    elseif first_et then       -- d may be nil here !
      if has_en then
        if last == 'l' then
          temp = 'l'    -- W7
        else
          temp = 'en'   -- W5
        end
      else
        temp = 'on'     -- W6
      end
      for e = first_et, #nodes do
        if nodes[e][1].id == GLYPH then nodes[e][2] = temp end
      end
      first_et = nil
      has_en = false
    end

    if d then
      if d == 'al' then
        d = 'r'
        last = 'al'
      elseif d == 'l' or d == 'r' then
        last = d
      end
      prev_d = d
      table.insert(nodes, {item, d, outer_first})
    else
      -- Not sure about the following. Looks too 'ad hoc', but it's
      -- required for numbers, so that 89 19 becomes 19 89. It also
      -- affects n+cs/es+n.
      if prev_d == 'an' or prev_d == 'en' then
        table.insert(nodes, {item, 'on', nil})
      end
    end

    outer_first = nil

  end

  -- TODO -- repeated here in case EN/ET is the last node. Find a
  -- better way of doing things:
  if first_et then       -- dir may be nil here !
    if has_en then
      if last == 'l' then
        temp = 'l'    -- W7
      else
        temp = 'en'   -- W5
      end
    else
      temp = 'on'     -- W6
    end
    for e = first_et, #nodes do
      if nodes[e][1].id == GLYPH then nodes[e][2] = temp end
    end
  end

  -- dummy node, to close things
  table.insert(nodes, {nil, (outer == 'l') and 'l' or 'r', nil})

  ---------------  NEUTRAL -----------------

  outer = save_outer
  last = outer

  local first_on = nil

  for q = 1, #nodes do
    local item

    local outer_first = nodes[q][3]
    outer = outer_first or outer
    last = outer_first or last

    local d = nodes[q][2]
    if d == 'an' or d == 'en' then d = 'r' end
    if d == 'cs' or d == 'et' or d == 'es' then d = 'on' end --- W6

    if d == 'on' then
      first_on = first_on or q
    elseif first_on then
      if last == d then
        temp = d
      else
        temp = outer
      end
      for r = first_on, q - 1 do
        nodes[r][2] = temp
        item = nodes[r][1]    -- MIRRORING
        if item.id == GLYPH and temp == 'r' then
          item.char = characters[item.char].m or item.char
        end
      end
      first_on = nil
    end

    if d == 'r' or d == 'l' then last = d end
  end

  --------------  IMPLICIT, REORDER ----------------

  outer = save_outer
  last = outer

  local state = {}
  state.has_r = false

  for q = 1, #nodes do

    local item = nodes[q][1]

    outer = nodes[q][3] or outer

    local d = nodes[q][2]

    if d == 'nsm' then d = last end             -- W1
    if d == 'en' then d = 'an' end
    local isdir = (d == 'r' or d == 'l')

    if outer == 'l' and d == 'an' then
      state.san = state.san or item
      state.ean = item
    elseif state.san then
      head, state = insert_numeric(head, state)
    end

    if outer == 'l' then
      if d == 'an' or d == 'r' then     -- im -> implicit
        if d == 'r' then state.has_r = true end
        state.sim = state.sim or item
        state.eim = item
      elseif d == 'l' and state.sim and state.has_r then
        head, state = insert_implicit(head, state, outer)
      elseif d == 'l' then
        state.sim, state.eim, state.has_r = nil, nil, false
      end
    else
      if d == 'an' or d == 'l' then
        state.sim = state.sim or item
        state.eim = item
      elseif d == 'r' and state.sim then
        head, state = insert_implicit(head, state, outer)
      elseif d == 'r' then
        state.sim, state.eim = nil, nil
      end
    end

    if isdir then
      last = d           -- Don't search back - best save now
    elseif d == 'on' and state.san  then
      state.san = state.san or item
      state.ean = item
    end

  end

  return node.prev(head) or head
end
%</basic>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \section{The `nil' language}
%
%    This `language' does nothing, except setting the hyphenation patterns to
%    nohyphenation.
%
%    For this language currently no special definitions are needed or
%    available.
%
%    The macro |\LdfInit| takes care of preventing that this file is
%    loaded more than once, checking the category code of the
%    \texttt{@} sign, etc.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*nil>
\ProvidesLanguage{nil}[<@date@> <@version@> Nil language]
\LdfInit{nil}{datenil}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When this file is read as an option, i.e. by the |\usepackage|
%    command, \texttt{nil} could be an `unknown' language in which
%    case we have to make it known.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\l@nohyphenation\@undefined
   \@nopatterns{nil}
   \adddialect\l@nil0
\else
   \let\l@nil\l@nohyphenation
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    This macro is used to store the values of the hyphenation
%    parameters |\lefthyphenmin| and |\righthyphenmin|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\providehyphenmins{\CurrentOption}{\m@ne\m@ne}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The next step consists of defining commands to switch to (and
%    from) the `nil' language.
% \begin{macro}{\captionnil}
% \begin{macro}{\datenil}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\let\captionsnil\@empty
\let\datenil\@empty
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \end{macro}
% \end{macro}
%
%    The macro |\ldf@finish| takes care of looking for a
%    configuration file, setting the main language to be switched on
%    at |\begin{document}| and resetting the category code of
%    \texttt{@} to its original value.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ldf@finish{nil}
%</nil>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \section{Support for Plain \TeX\ (\texttt{plain.def})}
%
% \subsection{Not renaming \file{hyphen.tex}}
%    As Don Knuth has declared that the filename \file{hyphen.tex} may
%    only be used to designate \emph{his} version of the american
%    English hyphenation patterns, a new solution has to be found in
%    order to be able to load hyphenation patterns for other languages
%    in a plain-based \TeX-format.
%    When asked he responded:
%    \begin{quote}
%      That file name is ``sacred'', and if anybody changes it they will
%      cause severe upward/downward compatibility headaches.
%
%      People can have a file localhyphen.tex or whatever they like,
%      but they mustn't diddle with hyphen.tex (or plain.tex except to
%      preload additional fonts).
%    \end{quote}
%
%    The files \file{bplain.tex} and \file{blplain.tex} can be used as
%    replacement wrappers around \file{plain.tex} and
%    \file{lplain.tex} to acheive the desired effect, based on the
%    \pkg{babel} package. If you load each of them with ini\TeX, you
%    will get a file called either \file{bplain.fmt} or
%    \file{blplain.fmt}, which you can use as replacements for
%    \file{plain.fmt} and \file{lplain.fmt}.
%
%    As these files are going to be read as the first thing ini\TeX\
%    sees, we need to set some category codes just to be able to
%    change the definition of |\input|
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*bplain|blplain>
\catcode`\{=1 % left brace is begin-group character
\catcode`\}=2 % right brace is end-group character
\catcode`\#=6 % hash mark is macro parameter character
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now let's see if a file called \file{hyphen.cfg} can be found
%    somewhere on \TeX's input path by trying to open it for
%    reading...
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\openin 0 hyphen.cfg
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    If the file wasn't found the following test turns out true.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifeof0
\else
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When \file{hyphen.cfg} could be opened we make sure that
%    \emph{it} will be read instead of the file \file{hyphen.tex}
%    which should (according to Don Knuth's ruling) contain the
%    american English hyphenation patterns and nothing else.
%
%    We do this by first saving the original meaning of |\input| (and
%    I use a one letter control sequence for that so as not to waste
%    multi-letter control sequence on this in the format).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \let\a\input
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Then |\input| is defined to forget about its argument and load
%    \file{hyphen.cfg} instead.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
  \def\input #1 {%
    \let\input\a
    \a hyphen.cfg
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Once that's done the original meaning of |\input| can be restored
%    and the definition of |\a| can be forgotten.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
    \let\a\undefined
  }
\fi
%</bplain|blplain>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Now that we have made sure that \file{hyphen.cfg} will be loaded
%    at the right moment it is time to load \file{plain.tex}.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<bplain>\a plain.tex
%<blplain>\a lplain.tex
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Finally we change the contents of |\fmtname| to indicate that
%    this is \emph{not} the plain format, but a format based on plain
%    with the \pkg{babel} package preloaded.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<bplain>\def\fmtname{babel-plain}
%<blplain>\def\fmtname{babel-lplain}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    When you are using a different format, based on plain.tex you can
%    make a copy of blplain.tex, rename it and replace \file{plain.tex}
%    with the name of your format file.
%
% \subsection{Emulating some \LaTeX{} features}
%
%    The following code duplicates or emulates parts of \LaTeXe\ that
%    are needed for \babel.
%
% \changes{bbplain-1.0s}{2012/12/21}{\cs{loadlocalcfg} not loaded in
%    the format}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
%<*plain>
\def\@empty{}
\def\loadlocalcfg#1{%
  \openin0#1.cfg
  \ifeof0
    \closein0
  \else
    \closein0
    {\immediate\write16{*************************************}%
     \immediate\write16{* Local config file #1.cfg used}%
     \immediate\write16{*}%
     }
    \input #1.cfg\relax
  \fi
  \@endofldf}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{General tools}
%
%    A number of \LaTeX\ macro's that are needed later on.
%
% \changes{bbplain-1.0t}{2013/04/10}{Added \cs{@expandtwoargs}}
% \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/12/02}{Added \cs{zap@space}}
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/03/22}{Added \cs{@nnil}}
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/03/22}{Added \cs{@gobbletwo}}
% \changes{babel~3.9k}{2014/03/22}{Added \cs{protected@edef}}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\long\def\@firstofone#1{#1}
\long\def\@firstoftwo#1#2{#1}
\long\def\@secondoftwo#1#2{#2}
\def\@nnil{\@nil}
\def\@gobbletwo#1#2{}
\def\@ifstar#1{\@ifnextchar *{\@firstoftwo{#1}}}
\def\@star@or@long#1{%
  \@ifstar
  {\let\l@ngrel@x\relax#1}%
  {\let\l@ngrel@x\long#1}}
\let\l@ngrel@x\relax
\def\@car#1#2\@nil{#1}
\def\@cdr#1#2\@nil{#2}
\let\@typeset@protect\relax
\let\protected@edef\edef
\long\def\@gobble#1{}
\edef\@backslashchar{\expandafter\@gobble\string\\}
\def\strip@prefix#1>{}
\def\g@addto@macro#1#2{{%
    \toks@\expandafter{#1#2}%
    \xdef#1{\the\toks@}}}
\def\@namedef#1{\expandafter\def\csname #1\endcsname}
\def\@nameuse#1{\csname #1\endcsname}
\def\@ifundefined#1{%
  \expandafter\ifx\csname#1\endcsname\relax
    \expandafter\@firstoftwo
  \else
    \expandafter\@secondoftwo
  \fi}
\def\@expandtwoargs#1#2#3{%
  \edef\reserved@a{\noexpand#1{#2}{#3}}\reserved@a}
\def\zap@space#1 #2{%
  #1%
  \ifx#2\@empty\else\expandafter\zap@space\fi
  #2}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \LaTeXe\ has the command |\@onlypreamble| which adds commands to
%    a list of commands that are no longer needed after
%    |\begin{document}|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\@preamblecmds\@undefined
  \def\@preamblecmds{}
\fi
\def\@onlypreamble#1{%
  \expandafter\gdef\expandafter\@preamblecmds\expandafter{%
    \@preamblecmds\do#1}}
\@onlypreamble\@onlypreamble
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Mimick \LaTeX's |\AtBeginDocument|; for this to work the user
%    needs to add |\begindocument| to his file.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\begindocument{%
  \@begindocumenthook
  \global\let\@begindocumenthook\@undefined
  \def\do##1{\global\let##1\@undefined}%
  \@preamblecmds
  \global\let\do\noexpand}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\@begindocumenthook\@undefined
  \def\@begindocumenthook{}
\fi
\@onlypreamble\@begindocumenthook
\def\AtBeginDocument{\g@addto@macro\@begindocumenthook}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    We also have to mimick \LaTeX's |\AtEndOfPackage|. Our
%    replacement macro is much simpler; it stores its argument in
%    |\@endofldf|.
%
%  \changes{babel~3.9h}{2013/11/28}{Set \cs{bbl@opt@hyphenmap} to 0 - we
%     presume hyphenmap=off in plain}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\AtEndOfPackage#1{\g@addto@macro\@endofldf{#1}}
\@onlypreamble\AtEndOfPackage
\def\@endofldf{}
\@onlypreamble\@endofldf
\let\bbl@afterlang\@empty
\chardef\bbl@opt@hyphenmap\z@
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \LaTeX\ needs to be able to switch off writing to its auxiliary
%    files; plain doesn't have them by default.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\if@filesw\@undefined
  \expandafter\let\csname if@filesw\expandafter\endcsname
    \csname iffalse\endcsname
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Mimick \LaTeX's commands to define control sequences.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\newcommand{\@star@or@long\new@command}
\def\new@command#1{%
  \@testopt{\@newcommand#1}0}
\def\@newcommand#1[#2]{%
  \@ifnextchar [{\@xargdef#1[#2]}%
                {\@argdef#1[#2]}}
\long\def\@argdef#1[#2]#3{%
  \@yargdef#1\@ne{#2}{#3}}
\long\def\@xargdef#1[#2][#3]#4{%
  \expandafter\def\expandafter#1\expandafter{%
    \expandafter\@protected@testopt\expandafter #1%
    \csname\string#1\expandafter\endcsname{#3}}%
  \expandafter\@yargdef \csname\string#1\endcsname
  \tw@{#2}{#4}}
\long\def\@yargdef#1#2#3{%
  \@tempcnta#3\relax
  \advance \@tempcnta \@ne
  \let\@hash@\relax
  \edef\reserved@a{\ifx#2\tw@ [\@hash@1]\fi}%
  \@tempcntb #2%
  \@whilenum\@tempcntb <\@tempcnta
  \do{%
    \edef\reserved@a{\reserved@a\@hash@\the\@tempcntb}%
    \advance\@tempcntb \@ne}%
  \let\@hash@##%
  \l@ngrel@x\expandafter\def\expandafter#1\reserved@a}
\def\providecommand{\@star@or@long\provide@command}
\def\provide@command#1{%
  \begingroup
    \escapechar\m@ne\xdef\@gtempa{{\string#1}}%
  \endgroup
  \expandafter\@ifundefined\@gtempa
    {\def\reserved@a{\new@command#1}}%
    {\let\reserved@a\relax
     \def\reserved@a{\new@command\reserved@a}}%
   \reserved@a}%
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\DeclareRobustCommand{\@star@or@long\declare@robustcommand}
\def\declare@robustcommand#1{%
   \edef\reserved@a{\string#1}%
   \def\reserved@b{#1}%
   \edef\reserved@b{\expandafter\strip@prefix\meaning\reserved@b}%
   \edef#1{%
      \ifx\reserved@a\reserved@b
         \noexpand\x@protect
         \noexpand#1%
      \fi
      \noexpand\protect
      \expandafter\noexpand\csname\bbl@stripslash#1 \endcsname
   }%
   \expandafter\new@command\csname\bbl@stripslash#1 \endcsname
}
\def\x@protect#1{%
   \ifx\protect\@typeset@protect\else
      \@x@protect#1%
   \fi
}
\def\@x@protect#1\fi#2#3{%
   \fi\protect#1%
}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following little macro |\in@| is taken from \file{latex.ltx};
%    it checks whether its first argument is part of its second
%    argument. It uses the boolean |\in@|; allocating a new boolean
%    inside conditionally executed code is not possible, hence the
%    construct with the temporary definition of |\bbl@tempa|.
%
% \changes{bbplain-1.0s}{2013/01/15}{Use \cs{bbl@tempa} as
%    documented}
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\bbl@tempa{\csname newif\endcsname\ifin@}
\ifx\in@\@undefined
  \def\in@#1#2{%
    \def\in@@##1#1##2##3\in@@{%
      \ifx\in@##2\in@false\else\in@true\fi}%
    \in@@#2#1\in@\in@@}
\else
  \let\bbl@tempa\@empty
\fi
\bbl@tempa
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    \LaTeX\ has a macro to check whether a certain package was loaded
%    with specific options. The command has two extra arguments which
%    are code to be executed in either the true or false case.
%    This is used to detect whether the document needs one of the
%    accents to be activated (\Lopt{activegrave} and
%    \Lopt{activeacute}). For plain \TeX\ we assume that the user
%    wants them to be active by default. Therefore the only thing we
%    do is execute the third argument (the code for the true case).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\@ifpackagewith#1#2#3#4{#3}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The \LaTeX\ macro |\@ifl@aded| checks whether a file was
%    loaded. This functionality is not needed for plain \TeX\ but we
%    need the macro to be defined as a no-op.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\@ifl@aded#1#2#3#4{}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    For the following code we need to make sure that the commands
%    |\newcommand| and |\providecommand| exist with some sensible
%    definition. They are not fully equivalent to their \LaTeXe\
%    versions; just enough to make things work in plain~\TeX
%    environments.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\@tempcnta\@undefined
  \csname newcount\endcsname\@tempcnta\relax
\fi
\ifx\@tempcntb\@undefined
  \csname newcount\endcsname\@tempcntb\relax
\fi
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    To prevent wasting two counters in \LaTeX$\:$2.09 (because
%    counters with the same name are allocated later by it) we reset
%    the counter that holds the next free counter (|\count10|).
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\bye\@undefined
  \advance\count10 by -2\relax
\fi
\ifx\@ifnextchar\@undefined
  \def\@ifnextchar#1#2#3{%
    \let\reserved@d=#1%
    \def\reserved@a{#2}\def\reserved@b{#3}%
    \futurelet\@let@token\@ifnch}
  \def\@ifnch{%
    \ifx\@let@token\@sptoken
      \let\reserved@c\@xifnch
    \else
      \ifx\@let@token\reserved@d
        \let\reserved@c\reserved@a
      \else
        \let\reserved@c\reserved@b
      \fi
    \fi
    \reserved@c}
  \def\:{\let\@sptoken= } \:  % this makes \@sptoken a space token
  \def\:{\@xifnch} \expandafter\def\: {\futurelet\@let@token\@ifnch}
\fi
\def\@testopt#1#2{%
  \@ifnextchar[{#1}{#1[#2]}}
\def\@protected@testopt#1{%
  \ifx\protect\@typeset@protect
    \expandafter\@testopt
  \else
    \@x@protect#1%
  \fi}
\long\def\@whilenum#1\do #2{\ifnum #1\relax #2\relax\@iwhilenum{#1\relax
     #2\relax}\fi}
\long\def\@iwhilenum#1{\ifnum #1\expandafter\@iwhilenum
         \else\expandafter\@gobble\fi{#1}}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \subsection{Encoding related macros}
%
%    Code from \file{ltoutenc.dtx}, adapted for use in the plain \TeX\
%    environment.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\def\DeclareTextCommand{%
   \@dec@text@cmd\providecommand
}
\def\ProvideTextCommand{%
   \@dec@text@cmd\providecommand
}
\def\DeclareTextSymbol#1#2#3{%
   \@dec@text@cmd\chardef#1{#2}#3\relax
}
\def\@dec@text@cmd#1#2#3{%
   \expandafter\def\expandafter#2%
      \expandafter{%
         \csname#3-cmd\expandafter\endcsname
         \expandafter#2%
         \csname#3\string#2\endcsname
      }%
%   \let\@ifdefinable\@rc@ifdefinable
   \expandafter#1\csname#3\string#2\endcsname
}
\def\@current@cmd#1{%
  \ifx\protect\@typeset@protect\else
      \noexpand#1\expandafter\@gobble
  \fi
}
\def\@changed@cmd#1#2{%
   \ifx\protect\@typeset@protect
      \expandafter\ifx\csname\cf@encoding\string#1\endcsname\relax
         \expandafter\ifx\csname ?\string#1\endcsname\relax
            \expandafter\def\csname ?\string#1\endcsname{%
               \@changed@x@err{#1}%
            }%
         \fi
         \global\expandafter\let
           \csname\cf@encoding \string#1\expandafter\endcsname
           \csname ?\string#1\endcsname
      \fi
      \csname\cf@encoding\string#1%
        \expandafter\endcsname
   \else
      \noexpand#1%
   \fi
}
\def\@changed@x@err#1{%
    \errhelp{Your command will be ignored, type <return> to proceed}%
    \errmessage{Command \protect#1 undefined in encoding \cf@encoding}}
\def\DeclareTextCommandDefault#1{%
   \DeclareTextCommand#1?%
}
\def\ProvideTextCommandDefault#1{%
   \ProvideTextCommand#1?%
}
\expandafter\let\csname OT1-cmd\endcsname\@current@cmd
\expandafter\let\csname?-cmd\endcsname\@changed@cmd
\def\DeclareTextAccent#1#2#3{%
  \DeclareTextCommand#1{#2}[1]{\accent#3 ##1}
}
\def\DeclareTextCompositeCommand#1#2#3#4{%
   \expandafter\let\expandafter\reserved@a\csname#2\string#1\endcsname
   \edef\reserved@b{\string##1}%
   \edef\reserved@c{%
     \expandafter\@strip@args\meaning\reserved@a:-\@strip@args}%
   \ifx\reserved@b\reserved@c
      \expandafter\expandafter\expandafter\ifx
         \expandafter\@car\reserved@a\relax\relax\@nil
         \@text@composite
      \else
         \edef\reserved@b##1{%
            \def\expandafter\noexpand
               \csname#2\string#1\endcsname####1{%
               \noexpand\@text@composite
                  \expandafter\noexpand\csname#2\string#1\endcsname
                  ####1\noexpand\@empty\noexpand\@text@composite
                  {##1}%
            }%
         }%
         \expandafter\reserved@b\expandafter{\reserved@a{##1}}%
      \fi
      \expandafter\def\csname\expandafter\string\csname
         #2\endcsname\string#1-\string#3\endcsname{#4}
   \else
     \errhelp{Your command will be ignored, type <return> to proceed}%
     \errmessage{\string\DeclareTextCompositeCommand\space used on
         inappropriate command \protect#1}
   \fi
}
\def\@text@composite#1#2#3\@text@composite{%
   \expandafter\@text@composite@x
      \csname\string#1-\string#2\endcsname
}
\def\@text@composite@x#1#2{%
   \ifx#1\relax
      #2%
   \else
      #1%
   \fi
}
%
\def\@strip@args#1:#2-#3\@strip@args{#2}
\def\DeclareTextComposite#1#2#3#4{%
   \def\reserved@a{\DeclareTextCompositeCommand#1{#2}{#3}}%
   \bgroup
      \lccode`\@=#4%
      \lowercase{%
   \egroup
      \reserved@a @%
   }%
}
%
\def\UseTextSymbol#1#2{%
%   \let\@curr@enc\cf@encoding
%   \@use@text@encoding{#1}%
   #2%
%   \@use@text@encoding\@curr@enc
}
\def\UseTextAccent#1#2#3{%
%   \let\@curr@enc\cf@encoding
%   \@use@text@encoding{#1}%
%   #2{\@use@text@encoding\@curr@enc\selectfont#3}%
%   \@use@text@encoding\@curr@enc
}
\def\@use@text@encoding#1{%
%   \edef\f@encoding{#1}%
%   \xdef\font@name{%
%      \csname\curr@fontshape/\f@size\endcsname
%   }%
%   \pickup@font
%   \font@name
%   \@@enc@update
}
\def\DeclareTextSymbolDefault#1#2{%
   \DeclareTextCommandDefault#1{\UseTextSymbol{#2}#1}%
}
\def\DeclareTextAccentDefault#1#2{%
   \DeclareTextCommandDefault#1{\UseTextAccent{#2}#1}%
}
\def\cf@encoding{OT1}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    Currently we only use the \LaTeXe\ method for accents for those
%    that are known to be made active in \emph{some} language
%    definition file.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\DeclareTextAccent{\"}{OT1}{127}
\DeclareTextAccent{\'}{OT1}{19}
\DeclareTextAccent{\^}{OT1}{94}
\DeclareTextAccent{\`}{OT1}{18}
\DeclareTextAccent{\~}{OT1}{126}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    The following control sequences are used in \file{babel.def}
%    but are not defined for \textsc{plain} \TeX.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\DeclareTextSymbol{\textquotedblleft}{OT1}{92}
\DeclareTextSymbol{\textquotedblright}{OT1}{`\"}
\DeclareTextSymbol{\textquoteleft}{OT1}{`\`}
\DeclareTextSymbol{\textquoteright}{OT1}{`\'}
\DeclareTextSymbol{\i}{OT1}{16}
\DeclareTextSymbol{\ss}{OT1}{25}
%    \end{macrocode}
%
%    For a couple of languages we need the \LaTeX-control sequence
%    |\scriptsize| to be available. Because plain \TeX\ doesn't have
%    such a sofisticated font mechanism as \LaTeX\ has, we just |\let|
%    it to |\sevenrm|.
%
%    \begin{macrocode}
\ifx\scriptsize\@undefined
  \let\scriptsize\sevenrm
\fi
%</plain>
%    \end{macrocode}
%
% \Finale
%
\endinput
%
% Local Variables:
% mode: doctex
% coding: utf-8
% TeX-engine: luatex
% End:
